all right here we go four three two
hello bill hi what's going on man
I am very excited to be here how much
sided to have you here excellent um the
social leap yes what's the social leap
I'll tell you all about it please do
okay so um the story that I want to tell
is basically how we got here how we
became human and so that story begins
about six or seven million years ago
when our ancestors left the rain forest
and so the question is why would they
leave and how would they survive once
they left and and that's what the social
leap is so it takes a second to get it
all out there okay yeah all right so
here's a story so if you look back about
seven million years
our ancestors and chimps we had a common
ancestor at about that point in time six
or seven million years ago and that
common ancestor we don't know exactly
what it looked like but it was from all
we can tell it was awfully close to
today's chimps and so there if you look
at gyms today you can get a pretty good
sense of what life was like then and
chimps today are really interesting
they're basically at the top of the food
chain in the rain forest they're super
fast up in the trees super athletic and
they because it traveled in groups even
amazing tree climbers like leopards
won't try to attack them in trees
it's just they it's they're too
dangerous too fast but if you look at a
chimp on the ground it can't even lock
its knees it's this kind of cute little
stumbled in a long thing and then the
question is why would an animal that
runs the show in the canopy leave the
rainforest for the savanna and then how
to survive once it did that and that's
that's the story of this book and then
how that manifests itself to where we
are today so really my goal I'm a
psychologist I want to understand why we
are the way we are and so in trying to
figure that out I said well let's take a
look back all the way to our common
ancestors and see some of the key events
and how they might have had an influence
on how we are today so the first
question is why would we leave the trees
right here we are where dominant
position where we're food on the ground
why would we ever take that risk and the
basic story there is the great African
Rift Valley I'm not sure if you've
you're familiar with it at all but
basically it runs down from up at the
Red Sea down to the coast of Mozambique
and
think of it like a Geographic zipper you
know all the world sits on these
tectonic plates and sometimes they crash
into each other like how India's
smashing into Asia and crates the
Himalayas
sometimes they literally tear apart and
Africa's tearing apart at the great
African Rift Valley
so that plate that has Somalian Ethiopia
Tanzania Kenya that's moving off to the
lower right the rest of Africa is moving
off to the upper left and I got no idea
why it's been going on for quite a while
but one of the consequences of that is
that the East Africa's starting to rise
up slowly bit by bit and when it rises
up the rainforests dry out and so
basically what you have is a situation
where our ancestors were on the east
side of that rift valley and it started
to dry out and now they're in a
situation where they've got this great
lifestyle their dominant position but
now they're pushed they're forced out on
to the ground increasingly more and more
because there's more and more ground and
less and less rainforest and so how do
they survive that what do they do in
order to make that work and this is a
what what period of time is this how
many millions of years ago six or seven
six or seven does this coincide with the
when when was the jump of the human
brain sighs well we'll get to that so
it's a super interesting question about
why that happened as well so basically
if you track us across the next three
million years how did our ancestors
survive when they're basically
chimpanzees on the open savanna and you
can get a hint of how they did it
because there's one chimpanzee group
that does live on the savanna in Senegal
and they they show some differences
between themselves and other chimps they
travel in slightly larger groups they
share and more nicely with each other
which is interesting that's kind of a
human trait as well and they also avoid
open space like they're just kind of
trying to stay near the trees as much as
possible and so and if you look at other
aids they're not AIDS but other primates
that are on the savanna like savanna
baboons they're only monkeys so they're
not as sharp as chimpanzees are but they
have a similar strategy large groups to
try to protect themselves and lots of
eyes to look out for predators and they
do fine on the savanna and so what I
suspect happen is for the first few
million years basically what you've got
is this chimp like an animal that's kind
of skirting the edges of Savannah and
nowhere near the top dominant position
they used to be and just kind of noodle
around and that takes I suspect that
takes us for about the first three three
and a half million years and if you look
at who we are then or Australopithecus
afarensis so it's if you looked at one
of them you'd think it belongs in a zoo
it looks almost like a chimpanzee and so
a chimp brain an answer to the first
part of your question is about 380 grams
an Australopithecus brain is about 450
grams so 3 million years of evolution
and all we've got forward is 70 grams so
why do we get so smart why do we take
off in the next few million years and
what is it that Australopithecus did
that that helped us survive and why do I
call that de socially then though I'm
kind of tied together and the basic
story is that by this point
Australopithecus has become bipedal and
we can talk about how that happened if
you'd like and so because they're
bipedal their waste is now stretched out
there their musculature like if you look
at chimpanzee pecks
they aim upward because of course chimps
climb and all the time Australopithecus
is more lateral like we are we're
basically completely lateral because
things are side to side as far as we're
concerned it's harder to climb a tree
but it's a whole lot easier to do a lot
of other things and we have much more
limber shoulder we have much more limber
wrists all that sort of thing and a lot
of that was in place by Australopithecus
so once they became bipedal they gained
a lot of these qualities and then the
question is why do those qualities
matter well the if you watch the
chimpanzee throw it's terrible at it
even though they're stronger than you
and I are pound for pound by a sizable
margin when they throw their inept they
can't gain very well and they typically
use two hands because they're not lined
up well to throw if you watch a really
good thrower like you know a gridiron a
football player a baseball player or
hunter-gatherer throw you know it's a
full body motion you step forward with
the other leg there's this rotation in
the very last minute you bring your
wrist through well what that does is it
creates an enormous amount of elastic
energy across your muscles tendons and
ligaments and the end of that throw for
a human is like the snapping of a rubber
band so chimps can't do that they're not
lined up properly but Australopithecus
got to the point where they could
probably do that pretty well and so now
and this purely a by-product or
bipedalism because it stretched out
their whole body and they don't
not climbing as much anymore so their
musculature is more lateral which would
have been help them for throwing so now
you get to a point where they have
access to the single most important
military invention in history which is
the capacity to kill at a distance so if
you and I are running around the
Savannah and a lion attacks us and we
got fifty of our best friends we could
kill it with our bare hands but a lot of
us are going to die in the process right
because you think 50 of us let's make it
a hundred that would you know and I'd be
super confident were people you wouldn't
worry very much but but even if we could
so we knew what we're doing we're all
armed with knives whoever goes in first
is screwed right right and so the
capacity kill at a distance though
allows a larger force of weaker
individuals to completely defeat a
stronger and so once they gain this
capacity to throw if they were attacked
by lions or something like that whereas
in the past they did just scattered for
the trees now they could throw stones at
it and defend themselves now an
Australopithecus throwing rocks at a
lion it's going to be in the belly of a
slightly annoyed lion in about three
minutes right right but fifty
australopithecines throwing rocks at
lions is a totally different story and
so it's this is the baddie here's the
throwing hypothesis that what what
changed everything was throwing and the
reason it changed everything is that it
caused us it was the first reason why we
should have any effective collective
action because it's not a good strategy
when you're on your own it's not a good
strategy if I do it and the rest of the
group hits heads for the trees but it's
a great strategy if we all do it
together yeah and so for the first time
in history the group's goals in our
history in our line the primate line the
group's goals aligned with the
individual goals which is let's
cooperate and work together to try to
drive away these predators mmm now it if
you look at a lion and you look at
someone throwing rocks it still seems
like a really big ask right to drive
that thing away or kill it throwing
rocks and so but Barbara Isaac was one
of the first anthropologists to propose
a hypothesis quite a while ago went back
and looked through the historical record
and these extraordinary stories of how
effective people are throwing rocks and
so in when the Portuguese went to the
Canary Islands to try to subjugate it
they rock up with you know armor
crossbows and this isn't a like 14
something and all the locals were on
with with stones and despite the fact
that the Portuguese are there in army
trained you know ready to shoot and and
in their armor they were just decimated
by the local stone rocks at them and
this store has happened over and over
again and when you read these accounts
they're extraordinary I can read you
some examples from here they just the
happen in Australia it happened in the
Canary Islands it happened elsewhere
they just saw rocks incredibly
accurately incredibly hard and really
fast hmm
so and there's you know accounts in
Africa basically killing a zebra with
one blow of a rock to the head hmm
so like a pitcher of major league
pitcher yeah exactly Drock right who
gets very accurate at it yeah so do you
think they they must have practiced
constantly yeah and so what I suspect is
it we evolved to like to throw rocks and
so if I look now if you look at my son
as a for example when he was 18 months
old we would be walking back toward
Alice if he saw a rock on the street
he'd pick it up and start trying to
throw it and my wife said no no don't
let him throw rocks it's only gonna
cause trouble first of all I'm thinking
well maybe I'll develop a good arm so
I'm gonna go ahead and let him anyway
but but secondly he freaking wants to
this is like something inherently fun
right and I think all humans enjoy
throwing and it's it's stunning how good
you can get it with practice so we were
at the Ohio State Fair because before my
son was born and I was walking by one of
these stalls where you can throw in a
radar gun and so I thought oh here's I
was just started to date my wife and I
thought out here's a perfect chance to
impress her right house how much I am so
I said hey why don't I stop and I'll
throw some balls here in this net cuz
I'd never throw I don't know how fast I
could so she's like sure and I was I
played like Little League right so I
throw the ball and it's like 50 miles an
hour and and she's pretty impressed
because that sounds fast right then this
like kid shows up next to me he's gotta
be 12 years old probably weighs 85
pounds this total gang come out a muscle
in his body and he just starts freaking
throwing ball after ball at like 65
miles an hour and I'm like fuck I mean
she's not gonna be impressed me this
like human twit next thing he's kicking
my ass right and so I picked up the last
ball i frickin throw it as hard as I can
hurts my shoulder flies off at an odd
angle doesn't hit anything and it's like
57 miles an hour
now that little guy who's like literally
the size of an Australopithecus was
thrown in 65 and hitting the target
every time and so it's obvious that it's
skill it's practice that would have made
you good at this and if your life
depends on it
you're gonna do it well that makes sense
coming from a martial arts background
like like coordinated movement where at
the end of it you snap does that make
sense that this technique is so critical
even you're a larger person someone with
better technique would have more of an
impact with that so the throwing arm
I had read this if that was one of the
hypothesis there's several hypothesis
why the human brain doubled over a
period of two million years another one
was cooked meat right
yeah they figured out a way to get more
nutrients out of meat that's rocking it
over fire right so that's a little bit
down the road so here we are three and a
half million years ago and so for the
first time we put some pressure on
ourselves to have an advantage to be
smarter so imagine you're a zebra you
know what the hell good is it to you to
be Einstein you got runs what are you
gonna do with that brain right but it's
a big it's a big cost our brains are 20%
of our metabolic energy whether we're
doing math or watching TV it spreads
constant drain and so what are our
ancestors why would they pay for that
drain now just recently there was a
paper that came out maybe three months
ago now on a new brain expansion gene
they found or they think that's what it
is called notch 2 NL and it turns out
about 1215 million years ago there was
an accidental duplication of that gene
on our genome and it but it was
ineffective and it just sat there doing
nothing now that's a great way that
evolution works where it accidentally
doubles a gene because then you know you
can mess with it and the old gene still
doing the job right mm-hmm so it sat
there for about nine million years in
our line till about three million years
ago around Australopithecus and then it
duplicated itself and it came online
again and what that gene seems to do is
it makes our brain remain as stem cells
for longer which means a lot more
duplication before they run away and
start becoming neurons and so if I had
to guess I'd say that that probably that
gene coming online
probably happened many times in the past
and every time it happen in the past it
was more cost than it was worth and so
what's the chimp gonna do with a little
bit more brain and just means more
calories and what does he gain from it
but now that we're working together
now that we have collective action all
sorts of things open up we could we
could devise division of labor I'll say
hey man you do this and I'll do that
because Australopithecus they've got 70
more grams in a chimp they can't do
things like that they can't all throw
rocks at the same time that's not rocket
science but all the kinds of things that
came next probably were enabled by that
process of us coming together and
deciding to work together and cooperate
so if you look at chimpanzees they don't
cooperate very well for example one of
the activities where they sort of
cooperate is when they hunt monkeys and
so they'll all gather round and they'll
see some monkeys in the trees and they
come in from every angle it's not very
coordinated it's kind of a wild
free-for-all but what's interesting
about it is that when the Hunts over
let's say you just sat there the whole
time and watched and I'm working my ass
off chasing these monkeys I got one you
come up and bug me four and I don't I
don't really handle it you like keep
nudging me till I share but I'm just as
likely to share with you if you helped
as if you didn't I don't make any
distinction and you'll never establish
effective groups if you can't reward
those who participate compared to those
who don't even little kids four year old
kids when you give them games to play
and they earn stickers if you didn't
play you know when you come up and ask
you don't get it you played even if you
didn't do your job right but you tried
boom you can have a sticker so humans
immediately get that that you get
rewarded for your activities as part of
the group chimps don't seem to have that
that's fascinating because but because
chimps really do have a sense of
fairness though and that that's one of
the issues that happened with the
captive chimp that attacked the man who
brought the birthday cake do you know
that story I don't know that's the awful
story oh he's this couple they kept a
chimp as a pet for a long time and then
as it got older it got a little violent
and they had to bring it to a sanctuary
and they brought it to a sanctuary and
they would go to visit it in the chimp
would remember them and they went to
visit it and it was on his birthday so
they brought him a cake and the other
chimps in the sanctuary were furious
that they didn't get the cake as well
they didn't think it was fair or they
were angry so they figured out somebody
had left a gate open they got out and
tore this guy apart yeah because he
didn't give them a cake yeah so there's
a the most famous example that is
actually with capuchin monkeys which
aren't nearly as smart as chimps and
it's this amazing study by Sarah Brosnan
and Fran's de Waal and if you want to
see it in action too
has it on a TED talk it's really quite
something to see and what they do in
that study is they teach these capuchin
monkeys to they give them pebble and
they teach the Capucines to return the
pebble and they give it a cucumber slice
and so it's learned the game for a
cucumber slices so if you wanted to ask
does the monkey think that's a fair
reward the answer has to be yes right
because it's it's doing that for
cucumber so now you and I are both
monkeys we're in our cage I returned the
pebble I get a cucumber now you return
the pebble and they hand you a grape
Capucines much prefer grapes over of
cucumbers and so then you what happens
next
well I've been doing this behavior for
cucumbers but as soon as you get a grape
I'm like yeah I'm not playing anymore
and you watch this tape and the Capuchin
it they give you a grape they give me
the cucumber and the thing looks totally
pissed it's pounding on the ground it
throws the cucumber back it's amazing
yeah well and so the question is what
does that mean why do they care about
fairness in that way and and I think the
answer to that question is sexual
selection and so the key to sexual
selection is it doesn't matter what
everybody's getting so long as I'm
getting it bout as much as everybody
else but the second that you're starting
to get more than I have well then
whatever females in our group she's
gonna pick you before she picks me and
so everything is relative we may think
no why do you care so much about what
other people are doing why don't you
just be happy with what you got but
literally the day you find out that the
guy in the next studio over salaries
twice yours your salary sucks right
because and it makes sense because
literally she's gonna choose him now
before she chooses you comparisons the
thief of joy yeah that's exactly right
it's a it's a really unfortunate fact
because sometimes it matters a lot like
for example imagine I invent a drug and
I say here you take a dose and it'll
double your IQ instantly you're gonna
feel like a genius but unbeknownst to
you I give everybody two doses you walk
out of there you're gonna feel like a
dumbass because people saying stuff you
can't understand right so then it
wouldn't matter right but the killer
cases are things were where it's only
just a residue so for example there's
this amazing study where they showed
that people were making minimum just
above minimum wage are the ones who
don't want you to raise minimum wage
they're the most against it really yeah
now why would that be well right now
they've got a slight advantage over
people making minimum wage the day
minimum wage gets raised
now they're not any better off than
anybody else so even though they're the
most likely to benefit from it because
they may lose that job they haven't have
to take minimum wage they're actually
against it because it gives them a
slight advantage over you know the guy
next door this is based on one study
because I would think that the people
that would be most against it would be
the people that are hiring folks alright
fair enough
I it's only a it's only looking at
income so the the boss probably feels
even the more negative of all but if you
look at people's income and their and
their feelings about raising minimum
wage the people are making minimum wage
wanted to go up to people one notch
above do not and then as the higher you
go they do again really yeah Wow
up until you get to the point where
you're employing people right wells and
some employers want to raise it right I
mean yeah and some don't there's huge
argument about that now when it comes
back to the capuchin monkeys does the
same effect happen whether it's a female
or I don't know I mean so thing is and
people argue like crazy about exactly
what this means I don't think the
monkeys have a sense of fairness like
you and I have but I do think they have
a sense of hold on you're getting more
than I am I can't write this happen
otherwise I'm screwed and there's lots
of great evidence that if you let that
happen you're screwed but do the females
have that same sense of competitiveness
that they need to have the exact same
thing those other bitches or haven't
they get angry well here's the thing it
depends on whether your mating system is
gonna be pair bonding or not so if
you're a frog or a lots of different
frogs not all of them a laughing tree
frog or if you're a elephant seal or
something well all the females mate with
the best male because his job is just
sex
and so every female can have the best
one or the eat either in the situation
where they got no choice like the
elephant seals he controls the Rookery
or in a situation where they just listen
to all the croaking and then they got
you're the best croaker you're the dad
mmm but if your pair bonding like humans
or like lots of other animals birds etc
the then what you need is you've got
competition on both sides so she's
always competing to get the best male
and he's always competing to get the
best female now there's reasons why
male-male competition is always a bit
more intense than female female
competition but both of them are there
and the more monogamous the system gets
the more both sides compete for each
other hmm interesting
so what about in the case of like
bonobos where they're so polyamorous
bonobos are super interesting system so
you've got lots of polyamorous animals
bonobos our interests are also you know
so if you look at them one of the great
ways to look at our ancestors and what
their lives were like is you look in
your trousers and the size your
testicles tells you a lot about what
sort of mating system your ancestors had
so gorillas have tiny little testicles
and the reason that they have such tiny
testicles is they use their huge body to
drive away the other males and then all
the females are in his harem so he
doesn't need big testicles because he
only needs enough sperm in order to
inseminate the females he's got it
doesn't take much sperm to inseminate
any one female and testicles are really
expensive tissue to make and if you own
a pair and you land on and you know
they're uncomfortable - right and so
then you look at our testicles and
they're quite a bit bigger than a
gorillas but they're nowhere near the
size of a chimp or bonobo both you know
they're basically in many ways almost
the same beasts and so although socially
quite different and they have a system
where they basically have to wash out
the guy who was there before him and so
it takes really big testicles to have
sperm competition so their competition
is embodying each other although there's
a degree of that - they know full well
that when she comes into estrus in the
heat there's gonna be a line and if
you're fifth in line and you can watch
everybody out before you you mind at the
dead wash everybody there's a funny way
of putting it so it's this this testicle
size is directly proportionate to the
number of promiscuous females well
that's right the promiscuity of the
mating system yeah and so if you look at
our mating system we clearly evolved to
be largely monogamous but not entirely
our testicles are unnecessarily large
for an entirely monogamous species and
so we're a little bit on the wash the
guy out ahead of us
there's many people to make arguments
that are monogamy is socially reinforced
and it's not natural look if you look at
how to gatherers and and so the best the
best way that we get a sense of well
what what did we evolved to do is to
look at the remaining hunter-gatherer
societies particularly if you look at
what are called immediate return on to
gathers so there are people who eat
today what they killed today then you
get a lot of hunt - gathers once they
left the equator they could store food
and everything change for them and they
actually and
the babes they look a lot like us and we
can come back to it if you'd like but if
you look at hunter-gatherers around the
equator they're typically immediate
return kill eat and so those guys tend
to be tend to be there's always of
course human differences where a super
variable species but they tend to be
serially monogamous and so some people
pair up for life
lots of people pair up for five seven
years and then break apart and pair up
again and so you have a sequence of
children with the secrets of people
right but but largely monogamous not
entirely and the fact monogamous during
those time periods yeah largely now we
know every single animal we've ever
described as monogamous when we do the
DNA we now find they're not entirely mmm
but they're mostly mmm interesting so
have you ever read sex at dawn mmm-hmm
what did you think of that um no offense
but I think it's total crap Chris Ryan
do you hear that shit everybody's
rocking on your book bro
what did you think is crap about it I
just don't think the system works that
way that explain to people that may not
know what word I haven't read that book
now since it came out so let me remind
remind me of the thesis do you remember
the idea is that we evolved in these
small tribes of people that essentially
shared sexual partners oh yeah that's
bullshit and so the thing is that what
makes you say that so confidently well I
don't know I shouldn't say it quite so
confidently you're absolutely right I
believe that's bullshit how's that okay
why do you believe that's bullshit
because so human beings have very clear
evolved jealousy systems and they're not
just a product of the world that we live
in today you can see jealousy among
hunter-gatherers as well now the thing
is they get jealous about different
things because of course men and women a
slightly different pressure on them but
they both get jealous by infidelity now
that's not to say that the book is
incorrect about some societies in some
places because one of the interesting
things about humans is our flexibility
and so you can create a system and
someone togethers have where there's a
lot of that none of that there's some
really interesting ones where literally
once the woman gets pregnant she then
starts to sleep with all the other males
because she thinks her baby will gain
the qualities of all the men that she
sleeps with so I'm not trying to claim
that we're always monogamous because
absolutely that's untrue but I do think
that the dominant system is one of
serial monogamy and I would
and I think that that's the dominant
system is this is kind of the deal that
we made whereby the males go out and do
the hunting the females go out and do
gathering and that's basically universal
she tends to cook for him and that comes
back to the fire point you made which we
can come back to and and so they share
resources and and he's happy to share
resources and do his best to kind of
sort of look out for her kids I mean
human males aren't we don't take as much
care as human females do of our kids but
we're much better than the other great
apes and so that level of investment
he's gonna make is tends to be to the
degree that he believes that he's the
father of the kids now you have
societies where he doesn't know that
really all are polyamorous like that by
all means I don't know how what
percentage they are and it could even be
their more common than I believe but
when that happens the systems tend to
change a little bit and he's a little
bit less willing to look out try to help
out kids other than to do her a favor
unless the kid looks a lot like himself
now what about why having a system a
biological system where jealousy comes
up what makes you think that that
somehow or another negates the idea of
polyamorous relationships well it does
suggest that they're not our default
because it doesn't it more likely
suggests that it encourages competition
which is just natural
well now you think about Envy instead of
jealousy and so if I'm jealous I'm upset
that my wife slept with somebody else
last night he could be a lowlife I don't
envy a thing about him I don't want
anything he owns but I'm jealous of her
behavior I'm protective of what she's
done and so there's a wonderful
experiment David buss has run at the
University of Texas jealous of the man
as well you're not just jealous of her
behavior you're you're jealous of this
other male that gets to have sex with
your wife and could not possibly
encourage competition and encourage men
to be more aggressive or more ingenious
or just create encourage creativity
encourage better hunting skills so you
attract more women I mean all those
things see all these I would have more
oh yeah I would agree with all that but
I phrased it a little bit differently so
there's this wonderful study out of the
Philippines where they measured minced
huge number of men's to
when they were single and then they
waited a few years and measured it again
after they were they were still single
we're now they're married or now they're
married and they have kids okay and I'm
sure it wasn't a psychology study
because we can't afford to do that it
was probably some medical thing but they
used at answer this interesting
psychological question which what's HAP
who's most likely to get the girl by
their original testosterone levels and
what happens when you do well the guys
who got married in the intervening few
years had higher testosterone than the
guys who didn't so yeah you're
absolutely right we're out there
competing with other males in order to
get the girl and and there's lots and
lots that goes on there tons of really
interesting things but what's
interesting is once we get the girl our
testosterone drops and so if we once we
partner up and if we're in a monogamous
relationship not polyamorous but in a
monogamous relationship our testosterone
drops and then it drops again if we have
kids and testosterone is a great hormone
for getting out there and being
competitive with other guys it's not a
great hormone for being nurturing for
your children and it's not a great
hormone for being faithful to your
partner and so I think that we evolved
to compete with other males in order to
get into the mating game so if you look
at our ancestral DNA you know how you
can track our male and female ancestry
through mitochondrial DNA on the
mother's side and why you'll see that we
have far more female ancestors than male
not quite 2 to 1 but I think it's close
to that and so what does that tell us
well lots of guys are getting left out
of the mating game entirely and lots of
guys are inseminating lots of different
women so all those things that you said
are absolutely true and all that pushes
us for competition but part of what I
believe goes on as part of that
competition that we engaged in was in
order to get the girl to get into that
relationship in the first place could I
start be there because I think that if
you're gonna have a study on
testosterone and you you have to have a
study on lifestyle I mean it you if you
get married and you have children one of
the things that happens is you become
less active you don't exercise as much
you don't sleep as much all those things
have a pretty radical effect on hormone
production absolutely and it could well
be that you know you always have to have
a proximal mechanism whereby evolution
plays its game right so the distal cause
is as an evolved species testosterone
super important to get us into the
mating game but it's less you
once we're in it well all you what you
could all you have to do is have a
system whereby those things tend to
down-regulate testosterone exactly like
you said because you know those things
are gonna happen once you get partnered
up and so but mine's your when our
ancestors partnered up they're still out
hunting every day you know we may be
threatened I don't have Studies on we
don't unfortunately we know is that I'm
having with this is we have Studies on
the the general health and testosterone
and hormonal health of sedentary humans
yeah I mean I I would like to know what
their lifestyle is I would like to know
what they're doing yes doesn't seem to
make any sense to me because one thing
that everybody knows is that you get dad
bod right that's dad Bob what does dad
bought dad buys a guy who works all day
comes home sits on the couch probably
eats food you probably shouldn't eat
hangs out with his kids doesn't get a
whole lot of exercise works probably
doesn't sleep as much as he should that
that's a to me that's a symptom of poor
health and fitness right and it's not a
symptom our ancestors ever experienced
like it's not this is not necessarily an
indication of any sort of evolutionary
benefit of having low testosterone
because we've demonstrated for sure that
when people don't get sleep and when
they don't get exercise their
testosterone drops well those are two
things that absolutely happen you get
married and have children right and the
only thing I would say is the times the
time span of this study was only over a
few years that's even worse the thing
about having this kind of a study and
making these kind of kind of conclusions
based on I mean we we see we we know
these mechanisms are in place we already
know that there's natural effects of
sedentary lifestyle lack of sleep and
and the the effects are your hormone
production drops your body suffers you
become less healthy and this is this is
not indicating monogamy this is just
indicating poor health this is not like
an evolutionary advantage to having low
testosterone because it helps you raise
children you can have a high
testosterone still be a good dad and
raise children and still forsythia of
course all these things are bell curves
right yeah higher T you are the harder
gets I would say part yeah the problem
having is is drawing conclusions on this
one study and stating them as if they're
facts no you're absolutely right if I
say as a fact it's
over stated because we only know the
problem with almost all of our studies
is exact one you point out we've got
them on us right right we don't have and
so like the the sex studies are a
perfect example like things like female
orgasm what role does it play well you
need really good data on hunter gathers
to know the answer to that question if
you look at hunter-gatherers they don't
have dad bod right they're all rain and
whether their fathers are not because
they're out there hunting every day or
gather so if I if I over sold that my
apologies cuz you're absolutely right I
suspect though that you'd find the same
thing I don't know it it's all we got
right now but how can you suspect it I
mean it's just there's no data
yeah there's no data it's just when you
look at these guys I have a friend of
mine who he was was it how do you say
the name the Yanomami and I'm Olivia
Olivia well they're in Venezuela Brazil
yeah and he spent some time with them
and you see these people and the
lifestyle they lived there all barefoot
wandering through the jungle they have
these crazy looking feet with her toes
splay out because they're just
constantly gripping the floor with their
toes I mean they probably could choke
you with your feet you know and these
people just look so fit and healthy in
their in their 50s and 60s and 70s and
they have their shirt off and they're
ripped yeah they're super fit same holds
if you look at the hodza and Tanzania
any of these groups the Yanomami are
interesting because they're hunter or
two cultureless so they're actually
doing a little bit of gardening as well
but they're the ripped and strong and
they don't have obesity problems yeah
and so all I would say is that the same
thing holds the one thing that we found
in humans in our modern culture where we
have these data is if you're married and
have kids but you're still looking
around you're T hasn't gone down as much
now you're gonna point out quite rightly
that well maybe that's a different kind
of person than the person who marries
and isn't looking around and so it's all
confounded super hard to do experiments
on these things yeah and will be a lot
better off when we've got you know we're
losing the world's last time two
gatherers are disappearing yeah and and
it's not easy to collect these kind of
data but they're doing lots of genetic
work with these people right now all
over Africa because you know there's
we've got tons of genetic data now on
European descent and the East Asian
descent but almost none on Africans and
so that's a huge project underway and so
for all I know they're working on
hormones and
the things as well yeah that's I mean
the reason why I'm asking about this is
you you were so readily dismissing you
were so willing to dismiss that second
on yeah
well the a lot of the facts that are
laid out as facts in the book don't
really hold up and I mean I wish I'd
read it more recently and so I could go
through the details with you there's
some really good reviews by
anthropologists and by people who work
and you know sexual studies and stuff
like that going through the details we
read it as a we haven't this
evolutionary center Center for a
psychology and evolution and we read it
and went through it and we weren't
convinced I'm embarrassed to admit I
can't remember the details of Chris a
very smart guy he's a good friend it's
also a great book it is a great book I
would love to see him debate when those
folks I'm sure he probably has he
probably has and look I know that all
these things that we're talking about
are heavily debated right so so my
colleague Rob Brooks is a wonderful
evolutionary biologist in Australia
loves that book so the fact that I think
it's bullshit is obviously one person's
opinion and where I dismissed that
argument other people might say well
look there's a lot of cultures that that
do have much more like the system I told
you about where they have sex with lots
of men after they have their baby right
you humans are so flexible we can do all
those things we just changed the nature
of how we do things um the social leap
that I'm arguing about is not this pair
bonding thing it's about how our groups
came together to engage in collective
action
so in principle I'm agnostic on this
issue I just happen to disagree with
that I happen to feel like no I think we
made these deals and so to come back to
that study the David buss did that I was
starting to tell you about so bus has
this um he's got when he came along
people thought that the two sexes had
similar levels of jealousy for
infidelity and David was like well looks
inseminations internal and so men should
be a lot more worried about her sleeping
with somebody else then women should be
because he men never know for sure if
they're the father they can't see it
happen whereas you know if you're a
salmon you can say okay I'm the dad I
just watch that but females the
insemination is eternal but they know
they're the mother that's not their
concern they should be more concerned
about things like
has given her resources to help her
raise the kid and things like that and
so what bus found is if if you ask
people this question what would bother
you more imagine your wife having sex
with somebody that she just met for the
first time having this great time and
doing all these different funky things
with them and then never doing it again
or your wife develops this you know
ongoing emotional connection with
somebody she never touches him he never
touches her but they talk and I've
shared their feelings and stare deep in
each other's eyes what would bother you
more and you ask men and women that
question hmm so what would in your case
what would bother you more to have your
wife to know she had this one-off affair
fling sex only didn't care about the guy
or she develops a sort of emotional bond
with somebody never touches him that's a
good question
I'd really have to think about that it's
not anything cos nobody likes either no
yeah because it's a matter of time
before that dude gets in that's a no-no
in this case it's a guarantee right it's
a guarantee that they never never
touched never took long as he doesn't
talk shit about me that's your way I
would do so much better
well here's the thing weasels on average
men are more bothered by sex the one off
sex and women are more bothered by the
emotional emotional connection because
that's a big attraction could lead to
him leaving her well also if it's him
leaving her in directing his resources
elsewhere and so so it's it's mind you
every time we talk about gender
differences is super important to keep
mind they're heavily overlapping bell
curves right so it's never 100% this way
and except like do you have this organ
or something right but if you
psychologically it's always overlapping
but on this is a big effect men on
average are much more bothered by the
one-off sex and women on average are
much more bothered by the emotional
connection yeah that's fascinating
because I was reading something about
inappropriate emotional relationships
that people have at work and that this
is an issue with people that work
together they develop these you know
office friendships that lead to
inappropriate emotional relationships
and I was like wow this is a
you know I've never worked in an office
so I'm listening to this reading this
rather and I'm like what a strange world
that is like I get it though I get it
like if there's a guy and he's married
in a gal and she's married but they meet
at work and they staring each other's
eyes all day and they go to lunch and
maybe they even hold hands every now on
that well they become yeah that's so
that's where it crosses the line like
you're a lot of hug people when you hold
hands that's fuckin that's intense
that's skin-to-skin it is serious it's
it's gonna concern you if you're a
partner yeah but what's also gonna
concern you as a mere fact that you see
this kind of thing this deep
conversation happening and all that
because think about it if we evolved to
basically partner up for a while then
there's always gonna be the chance of
that next person long it's gonna be the
one Oh wedges years away serial monogamy
and both males and females gain from not
putting all their eggs into the same
genetic basket so if my part if my wife
partners up with you for a while she'll
get a certain kind of offspring and then
maybe that'll be a great thing but maybe
when the situation changes or the you
know in in tomorrow's world some smaller
or wimpier guy would be handy in some
way and so maybe she's better off
partnering with me next interesting yeah
it is fascinating when you break it down
that it really does become there's a
biological reason for these behaviors
and these the the motivation for the
jealousy and all these things that
there's right there's no history a
biological history to all this stuff and
and we don't know what I'm together is
how they would answer that question so
we can or only just assuming that the
answer we're providing is general but
for me those kinds of things suggest
that we involve we evolved in a lot of
long-term monogamous circumstances that
may have been serial and that was
certainly fooling around but if we were
polyamorous like the book says we'd have
bigger balls balls are so big though
compared to a chimp they're small
yeah but chimps are mean everything's
big with them well no our peoples have
way bigger than theirs right they got a
tiny little live large Paul's smaller
penises but pants are probably get in
the way right well no here's the thing
about so human beings copulate for an
extraordinarily long period of time and
and we also have this cryptic ovulation
you know where she's not showing you
that she's an E
so MailChimp's aren't interested unless
she has an enormous swelling on her
vagina and then they're like oh that's
super attractive to me oh I say so but
what about bonobos because they well
they do this funky sex thing all the
time right they'll have fun right yeah
they're all sorts of funky orgiastic
kinds of things we used there's a when I
taught at Ohio State University of the
zoo there has a great bonobos exhibit
and you bring your kids too and there's
a serious orgy going on and the kids are
like hey mom she's up Julie you know
yeah there's a lot of zoos that won't
happen ovals because they're right and
they're pretty interesting and so the
thing is that those kinds of things just
show you that it's complicated right any
kind of straightforward answer it's
gonna have some solutes yeah yes yeah
and I apologize if I get some earlier no
no and so anyway the but back to this
issue so if we had a total bonobo chimp
kind of system I don't think we'd
evolved those systems of jealousy
because what's what's to be gained by
that we're not making these long-term
partners why would you get these
differences again whenever I bring
Chris's book up but and I have to defend
it because have it a couple times in the
last year I haven't read it in at least
two years I'd have to go back and I read
it back over probably five years ago
when it came out when my friend's wife
got ahold of it my friend got it and my
friend's wife got all of it and she'd
throw right in a trash she read like a
paragraph or two and she's like fuck
this book yeah a lot of women react that
way whatever so when these chimp like
creatures from millions of years ago
slowly started walking upright and
started moving into the grasslands and
making making experiments and traveling
away from the jungle and this coincided
with the development of the throwing arm
and this could because they started
walking upright when did this
when did the cooked meat aspect okay
come along so they don't control fire so
also pigeons can't do that so now we go
forward we're now about three and a half
million years ago
you got to now go forward to about a
little less than two million years ago
to get to Homo erectus so once we get to
homo erectus we
now God and an ancestor that literally
if it went to the seed say well that's a
kind of rough hewn guy but you think
it's a person and not somebody who
belongs behind less so so a chimp brain
is 380
Australopithecus 450 and Homo erectus
960 whoa so you got doubling our brains
has no mind you it's a bigger being so
you're it's not as quite as big a
dramatic of a change as you think
but along with that comes all sorts of
capabilities now you write about this
book Catching Fire Richard Wrangham
argued that what enabled that so if you
look at the gut of a gorilla or a
chimpanzee in their brain they got a lot
of gut for a little bit of brain because
it takes a lot of digestion to keep a
little bit of brain going we have a tiny
gut for a huge brain and Wrangham argues
and I think quite rightly that the only
way you can achieve that is by releasing
more nutrients from your food and the
only way you can release more nutrients
from your food is by cooking it so when
he made that argument he thinks it goes
back to the beginning of Homo erectus
and I suspect he's right at this point
when he made the argument it was only
back to I remember half a million years
three and seven fifty thousand it's
already back to a million years ago we
found in caves in South Africa evidence
of controlled fire and so it'll probably
keep getting pushed back because you
know that craps hard to find right so
this was you say a half a million years
so now it's back to a million a million
years and he made that prediction when
it wasn't even that far back and a
million years ago even though they're
not technically it's not homo sapien no
we're still at Homo erectus and so they
started a 1.9 or so 1.7 million years
ago and 1.9 I think and what Homo
erectus could now do so now remember
what the argument is is this social leap
it's this collective action that not
only protects us on the savanna but sets
us on this new pathway it creates this
new niche it's this cognitive niche
although I think of it as a social
cognitive nish because it's the working
together that gives you all these
potential advantages to getting smarter
and so now that when that gene sitting
in our head if it kicks into gear those
and starts to work and and it quit leads
to cranial expansion those animals who
have it will have an advantage because
they can coordinate with each other
better and so they can remember hey man
you helped me out last time but you
weren't so you couldn't count on you so
I'm avoiding you and I'm sticking with
you they could do a lot of things with
that brain power and by the time you get
to homo erectus and the brain powers
double we see also
it's a super interesting things so
before Homo erectus when you look at our
tools that it's called an old wand tool
and it's basically a barely sharpened
rock and you never find an older wand
tool to very far away from where ever it
was quarried and made like you know you
look at the rock and the chips and not
far away is where it's lying on the
ground Homo erectus made a much nicer
tool it's by facial it took a lot of
energy to make it when we teach modern
anthropologists or grad students or
whatever to make them and you put them
in an fMRI magnet where it can measure
metabolism in your brain as you go you
see that it takes a lot of frontal lobe
functioning in order to make one because
it's a lot of planning how am I going to
hit it next to make this thing just
right compared to an old Awan tool to
make those doesn't take much frontal
functional I just whack it there and
it'll be sharp and so the so first of
all we know Homo erectus invented that
tool this is the seshu lien tool with
his by facial hand axe second of all and
one of my one of the coolest findings
there's some interesting work in a 1.2
million year old site in India by Kari
Shipton where he finds that the the
production of these Eshoo lean tools is
separated spatially about the place so
the first step is bashing loose a big
piece of rock and that's done here and
then 10 meters over there somebody's
doing the initial chipping on it and 10
meters over there
somebody's sharpening up the final
touches now if you were making it by
yourself why would you systematically
walk around the site as you made it you
almost assuredly wouldn't but if you've
got division of labour you're the big
strong guy you do the first thing then
you hand it to me and I do the finer
sharpening it makes sense that it would
be spatially distributed about the site
so there's that evidence for division of
labour there's the evidence that they're
bringing down some pretty fast animals
like horses and potentially even
bringing down elephants which in those
days are like twice the size of an
elephant and then the using Spears if
that's what we don't know because they
didn't survive right and nothing wood is
still around there's no sign of hafting
anything so if it was Spears it would be
in a wooden point so I think what they
could tap ding meaning the end of it
like Hutton half spear tip yeah exactly
and then exactly strata on earth or any
of a variety of way I put yeah and so
they there's no sign of that yet but
there's no reason why they couldn't have
a sharpened spear in fact we know that
remember
I mentioned the chimps in Senegal that
live on the savanna they're the only
chimps on earth who do this they'll bite
the stick to sharpen it and pokum
monkeys too when they're in the hull of
a tree and stab them did you see that
recent discovery and I mean it's really
recently there was an article I read one
or two days ago at about orangutans so
when they gave them wire they used the
wire to fashion it into fish hooks
no I didn't that's totally cool yeah
they figured out what if how to make a
fish hook independently and that's
amazing you've seen them like spear fish
right hang over trees that's that that
picture is actually of an orangutan
who's watched fishermen do he couldn't
do it remember an orangutan if it Mitch
you could literally pull your arms off
like that right the so enormous strength
but to get gearing for that strength
they got very poor motor control like
you and I can type they can't do that
right and so that orangutan that that
famous photo never could catch anything
he'd seen it done and it was trying to
see if he could do it - fair enough
just trying to use a try now but but you
know there's these corvids these crows
and and such they'll fashion hooks -
yeah so there's some there's a lot of
amazing evidence for this sort of animal
ingenuity and making tools well you've
seen the studies with crows where they
use one stick to get a larger you get a
larger you're mindful yeah it's amazing
now the one thing is we don't they can
do that and then they fail some super
simple tests so it could be that their
brains tiny though they are dedicated to
a particular way of solving a particular
problem because it's especially these
ones that live in new caledonia do this
in the wild and so they a fashion amount
of palm fronds they tear it off and they
reshape it and then they hook insects
out of the bark of trees and stuff and
so you could imagine that they've kind
of learned a specific way of
problem-solving but they can't do
something that to you because you would
solve that using some pretty domain
general mechanisms to you looks the same
but to them is totally different did you
find a thing with the orangutan it's
it's really crazy it's just well you
know I read something here we go my
intent spontaneously been straight wires
into hooks that's a physical food just
amazing use they have a photo of it
Jamie if you scroll down a little bit
there what does that photo it's just
I'll just him with a stick yeah yeah oh
yeah that's really really cool I had
read something a few years back that
said
that they were agreeing that chimpanzees
had officially moved into the Stone Age
yeah so chimpanzees will use stones as
tools so they'll crack nuts with them
but they've never they've never been
shown to modify stone bars and so if you
want to say the Stone Age usin stones by
all means if you want to say it's
modifying stones the the oldest evidence
that we have of potentially modified is
three point three million years ago
these Lamech we tools but there's
argument about how legit those up right
there's argument about a lot of those
sites to where they believe that they
find stone tools that are ancient
because it could easily just been shale
or yeah and overwash it's super
complicated to know exactly when it got
laid down every once we'll get lucky and
and the layers are super orderly and
then when you give to that layer you
know exactly what you got but now what's
the chances of finding what you're after
there right yeah now when they say the
Stone Age that's what they mean just the
idea of consciously using a rock to like
smash open a clam or something like that
yeah I mean to me that does I got a I
gotta admit I'm not quite sure
technically what an anthropologist would
mean when they say Stone Age but to what
what we know is that chimps will do that
they'll use rocks to they'll even have
it's they're clever enough to have an
anvil basically like a hammer a base
stone put a rock on it smash yeah what
they're not clever enough to do so
chimps have partial theory of mind and
theory of mind is this idea that I know
that the contents of your mind differ
from the contents of mine and all humans
get there when they're little around age
four and so the and you can see the
penny drop because they just assume
everybody knows the same things and
everybody's the same preferences and and
that's why when they're really little
their stories can be hard to follow
because they assume what's in your head
is the same as theirs they assume you
like the same things and actually it
turns out that the ones who have
siblings learn it earlier because it's
like oh you like the red jelly beans I
like the green ones awesome this is a
beneficial deal for both of us right
right
anyway chimps can get partial theory of
mind so I could see what you could say I
know what you could see it your angle if
I'm a chimp and I know that it might
differ from what I could see right but
they can't get to the point of knowing
that you could represent beliefs that
aren't true that you could have to
believe etcetera or that maybe I don't
like bananas but he does like but they
can't really get that no and so what the
problem is without theory of mind how do
teach somebody because if I just assume
you know what I know then when you're
doing a crappy job breaking the nut I'm
like what's wrong with Joe here Brian
and so chimp mothers take years to teach
their offspring to break these nuts open
ten years on average because first of
all they don't get a chance to do it
very often then that's got to be in
season second well it's easy to break
your fingers and that kind of slows you
down a third of all they'll occasionally
make some very specific Corrections when
they when the offspring is doing it
wrong but they don't know what the
problem is because they don't know what
the kid doesn't know and so when you
don't know that you can't teach and
that's why humans are stunningly
effective teachers that's fascinating
so chimps learn more just by observing
yeah and what's amazing about the way
chimps observe is that because we have
theory of mind we also do imitate
differently so this amazing experiment
by Andy White and his colleagues and
what they did is they created this
treasure box and so inside this treasure
box there's something that a chimp or a
kid wants like a little piece of food
and in the in one condition the box is
totally opaque so you can't see how it
works and they'll poke at the top of it
and then the poke in the middle and it
pops open and then they give it to the
chimp close it up chimp does the exact
same thing poke poke poke poke pops open
give it to a kid does the exact same
thing
now they do that they do the replicate
that same experiment but instead of
having that that box be opaque it's
translucent and you can see well and
truly that poking the top does nothing
the latch is actually right here and so
that initial poke was a waste of your
time this second one actually is one
that opened the box up when when chimps
watch that they skip the first one and
they just open the box
kids despite being smarter than a chimp
poking at the top first and then they
poke it in the bottom and we call this
over imitation they're imitating clearly
irrelevant actions now why would anybody
imitate clearly irrelevant actions what
advantage would it give you well if your
theory of mind you say well that's Joe's
box he knows something about it there
may be a reason why I can't see but
there may be reason why he's poking at
the top first and so I better do
everything that he does I better have
the highest fidelity copying that I
possibly can because it may be valuable
and what you end up with is these
systems around the world where people
eat these amazing foods that you think
you know how on earth
they've ever figured that out well this
probably developed step by step and
everybody's always got the super high
fidelity imitation because they're over
imitating so my favorite example is in
New Guinea they'd the sago palm I'm not
sure if you ever seen a sago palm but it
does not look like an edible tree it
just looks like a freaking tree right
mmm and it turns out that if you you
chop the tree down take the bark off
take like in ads or something similar
grind up the sawdust have all that
sawdust you then wash it off in warm
water because of course all the water in
New Guinea will be nice and warm and
that causes it's a super high starch
tree that causes the starch molecules to
separate from the sawdust because at
that point it's inedible so then they
have these cloths and the starch
molecules have passed through the cloth
the sawdust one now they collect this
cloudy water they put in these
traditional canoes they let it sit
overnight and all the starch sinks to
the bottom then they pour the water off
the top and now they've got this flower
but you have to dry it out in the Sun
really faster it becomes toxic so it's
like this nine step process that who on
earth could ever come up with it right
but once it's in place once they slowly
figured it out to make it work everybody
just does it the same way because even
though they don't know that they may
understand it but they don't need to
they just know this is how we do it
right well that's like that
what is that route that they cassava
yeah yeah that if you don't cook it
correctly
it's literally cyanide yeah and they
have water from it and they have to take
that water and they have the buckets of
these water these you know water for
that they're using to create this stuff
and they just leave it laying around and
kids are playing around it no yeah
pigs and animals around it and if they
drank it they'd be dead yeah i don't
know that i don't know the detoxing of
cassava unfortunately not i'm not
familiar with it but there's a lot of
those examples and you're also right
that in those kind of societies they're
super relaxed about things that we
strike the stress is really what exactly
but that stuff it becomes cyanide right
you could be right i don't know that one
see if you could find this cuz it's on
an episode of that same show it's not
this show is called meat eater it's my
friend Steve Rinella who went and spent
some time with them down in the jungle
of South America it's really interesting
stuff just seeing how these people
function and and they have this big vat
and they're cooking this stuff and
they're you know he's explaining like
right now if you a
you're you're dead you gotta wait a
while and like how the fuck did they
figure this out
researchers to get the real Java cyanide
was cyanide producing abilities cassava
is the third most important food source
in tropical countries but it's one major
problem the roots and the leaves the
poorly processed cassava plants contain
a substance that when eaten can trigger
the production of cyanide yeah it kills
the shit out of you yeah but it's weird
like that that thing is like a major
step on their diet well this is a really
good example of a the value of human
learning and and this over mutation
process right because the first guy way
they go okay I'm not gonna do that right
and then this person ate and they did
successful let's take a look at what
they did yeah so I remember when I was a
kid I was trying to learn to play
baseball and pitch the ball and the
person raises their knee almost up to
their nipples and I'm like that's the
most awkward pitching motion I've ever
seen but I didn't occur to me I'm not
gonna do that right it occurred to me
well there must be a reason to do that
so what can I do to try to emulate that
motion right the whole nine yards
there's a purpose for every one of those
pieces right and as humans we say well
you're teaching me how you've got to
have a reason for doing that and that's
the huge difference between us and
everybody else nobody else can do that
theory of mind thing to make that
assumption and that's why the chimps
skipped the step that they did they know
at least you know in that particular
experiment is really actually useless
and kids don't so your concept is that
as these animals that used to be monkeys
start evolving and and and trying out
new things one thing if they learn as
they enter into this new climate is
there's a massive benefit to cooperation
yes now I would say Apes not monkeys
because technically speaking well aren't
all apes monkeys but not all monkeys or
Apes No so monkeys and apes are
different they split off but monkeys not
a real word I mean it's not a word in
terms of scientific designation right no
no even a monkey or two different things
right but there's there's all world
monkeys in new world monkeys but all of
them have that the genus and species you
know it's letters but it's not a
scientific name right neither's a keys
not right now they're primates they're
all provides see if you google that cool
there's a whole article that
anthropologist wrote that not all apes
are monkeys but all monkeys no not all
monkeys or Apes but all apes or monkeys
cuz monkey is almost a slang term
because it's bullshit I think it's
bullshit but we'll find out that what I
would say is that all Apes and monkeys
are primates and they all started from
monkey ancestors right right and so but
then the Apes split off you got a rang
intent the great apes are orangutans
gorillas chimps and us right and then
you got Gibbons which are lesser apes
which split off quite a while ago and
they're very different they don't have
the brainpower of the great apes do you
find anything like that I've read this a
few years ago it confused the shit out
of me because I didn't know that monkey
wasn't a scientific term the scientists
talk about old-world monkeys in new
world mo right but it's almost a slang
term yeah there's something well
whenever you're if you're if you're
proper biologists and you have the
species just say that you know the Latin
pansy is pantera resource but it pops up
one on Google okay it's so long as
there's more to it
apes are monkeys in the same way that
monkeys are primates humans are Apes and
I'm a human it's called the nested
higher that's right this okay it means
that all Apes are monkeys but not all
monkeys or Apes just as all humans are
apes but not all apes are humans okay
yeah as I go mom click on that link I
think it's someone's website yeah this
is what I read you know is this a is
this a bullshit article I don't know
sorry
apes or monkeys deal with it I don't
know the turn I don't know the origin of
the term Mark Martin Robbins wrote a fun
piece to the lay scientist the other day
the incorrect term these monkeys just
cry apes they triggered an article by
Graham Smith for the Daily Mail in
Martin's words a great crime against
potential in progress and it's time for
someone to draw a line so as a pet aunt
how do you say that pedant Ted antic
yeah with a professional interest in the
issue I'm taking my stand to help ensure
the that a miscarriage of pedantic
justice doesn't occur this guy likes
that word nested hierarchies apes or
monkeys in the same way that monkeys are
primates humans or Apes and I'm a human
it's called the nested hierarchy and he
has a primate nested hierarchy set up
could be right I just don't know I don't
know the origin of the term mmm okay but
he cares and he cares enough to put that
up yeah he fucked my head up
dude it could be right okay why not
right he's if anybody's right he's right
or you're right I have no no knowledge
but all I mean is that so the ancestors
who moved to the Savannah
weren't monkeys like baboon monkeys yeah
like ancient chimp and so once we get
tome erectus they're basically like us
although they're our brains they're
around 960 we're around 1350 so we
literally have a chimp brain added on
top of there right so there's a big
difference and you're absolutely right
it's accelerating like crazy and I I'm
totally convinced well I believe ragams
right I mean we don't know for sure of
course but I believe he's right that it
was fire that played a huge role in that
and so what you got is this process
where our evolution facilitates our
further evolution right so you get the
cognitive capacities to control fire and
now that allows you to grow your brain
even larger because we can we can store
fat we can get more nutrients from the
food we eat we can detoxify other things
fire is super valuable even chimps will
eat if they go through our area where
there's a forest fire you know speaking
what's going on locally
they'll eat like the roasted nuts first
they really like that because I mean you
know just you go in your kitchen you
smell a raw steak it's like palatable
you smell it when it's cooking it's
delicious right that is interesting
right
that's us no salt or and yeah it's our
nose telling us that is a great source
of food and nutrients that's not so much
that is interesting I've never thought
about it that way but yeah there's a
tremendous difference in the way your
your body reacts to it and it's not just
based on your experience eating it it's
just smells amazing and so Wrangham
talks about he argues that you've you
can't live on a diet of raw food unless
you're eating these like super fruits
and stuff like that basically we've
horticulture it into existence because
raw food just doesn't give you enough
calories so the example that he uses
which is a great one
his chimps literally spend something
like six to eight hours a day chewing
just to soften up the food enough so
that they can swallow it and digest it
right we you know if sushi you're hardly
you know some of the things that we've
cooked and that's raw in that case but
you know cooked steak a really nice one
you barely chew it at all down the hatch
ago that's a great argument for gorillas
as well right because gorillas are just
eating roots yeah fucking celery and so
literally they have a humongous gut
right constant you
in order to me and they've got hewed the
sagittal crest right here with the bone
so that the muscles attach to it so they
can chew hard enough to get through all
that stuff and make a digestible and
still there God is enormous yeah that is
interesting the chimps have those
enormous chewing muscles on their head
and so we lost that's another example
where somebody along the way lost I
can't remember what that gene was where
our muscles weaken in our jaw and that
would have been a that would have been a
death knell if you're back before
cooking opposed cooking all that does is
free up space get rid of some
unnecessary muscle free up more screen
eyo space for brains the inside not the
outside so is it likely that there was a
bunch of different factors that there
was natural selection in play and that
there was also the the throwing arm and
then also cooking and also this this
cooperative effort that led to people
being a little bit more ingenious a
little bit smarter and how they hunted
and how they tried to get food and then
how they protected their fire how they
cultivated fire and then all these
things led to more clever behavior which
led to a natural selection of clever
more clever chimps with larger brains or
Apes rather with larger brains
absolutely and so anytime you got
something major happening it probably
doesn't have a single cause it probably
has lots and lots of causes and so in
this case all these kind of factors came
together now if you're standing at the
outset and you're playing God and saying
well let's see what happens when I dry
out the rainforests I think 9 times out
of 10 the chimps all end up dead
right right but somehow we got really
lucky and they went down this very
particular road and once they got their
social act together and they started
cooperating chimps are never gonna be
very effective in groups because they
can't get along they can't cooperate
very well but but once these animals
probably add Australopithecus but maybe
not so later of course we don't know all
we can look is what they were capable of
but it fits the storyline that they
would have been the ones who developed
that once that happened social becomes
everything so we tend to think about
what are the challenges of physical life
like you know that sago palm you move
into that territory and you got a
freaking figure that out it seems
enormously complicated but you have to
remember that before modern travel was
invented everybody walked everywhere
which meant you spent your entire life
basically in territory that you're
familiar with or the kinds of animals
that live there the kinds of problems
that you face
so cognitively the terrain is not really
a challenge for you and how to even
making food in those really complicated
ways it's not a challenge for you once
you got theory of mine and you can learn
how to do it but what is a huge
challenge for you it's the social
interactions with each other because as
my group gets smarter if I'm not smarter
first of all remember we talked about
sexual selection I'm not gonna get
picked I'll get left behind right
second of all we live in a world where
there's no law enforcement and so the
day that you decide that I'm more
trouble than I'm worth I go to sleep and
I never wake up again and so I have to
be able to manage some very complicated
relationships it's a little bit in my
mind it's like every morning when you
wake up it's to an episode of The
Sopranos how are you gonna find a way to
get through your day without getting
whacked right and if you can't figure it
out that's the end of your line hmm have
you ever read any Terence Mckenna
I know you're familiar with something
called the stoned ape theory no sorry
not McKenna it was a he was a ethno
botanist he was also a psychedelic
adventurer and he had a theory and the
theory was that the what you're talking
about this climate change that also
coincided with the doubling of the human
brain sighs his theory was that one of
the things that was in play was that
these Apes would experiment with
different food sources as they moved
into the grasslands and there was a lot
of undulates in these grasslands and at
psilocybin mushrooms which we know
existed back then would grow in these
grasslands and that these monkeys these
apes rather started consuming psilocybin
mushrooms and it led them to be more
creative it also led to specific traits
like the development of language that
eating mushrooms in low doses increases
visual acuity which would lead them to
be better hunters or more perceptive it
also leads them to be hornier which
would most likely involve more breeding
more sexual activity and possibly select
the the ones that chose the the
mushrooms would maybe possibly breed
more than the ones that didn't choose
the mushrooms because they were more
into it and were more social more
sexually active and he has a series of
like
his brother dentist who's still alive
detailed it on a podcast we did the very
first podcast we did his brother is an
actual scientist and detailed it in
terms of how psilocybin affects the
brain and what areas of the brain it
what what what actually takes place when
you're under the influence of this and
that it could very potentially have led
to the development of language and that
this all these things in play the
throwing arm the you know developing
these new social networks where you need
to communicate with each other along
with the harnessing of fire along with
the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms
on a regular basis because they were
incredibly frequent and very edible
all right that's total trip I've never
heard of that before yeah it would be
really like that's a really good example
of some random thing if it really did
play that role how random that is that
these freaking things happen to be
growing there and that they happen to be
attracted to them innate them we know
that animals like to get high elephants
will eat these fruit that have well the
drunk in this case it over ripened and
have become alcoholic we know that
animals will do that you've seen Jaguars
that consume psychedelic plants and they
rely on their back and stare at the sky
oh it's amazing but you know what
ayahuasca is no ayahuasca is a it's a
way that these people in the rainforest
develop untold thousands of years ago of
developing an orally active version of
dimethyltryptamine do you know what
dimethyltryptamine no I'm not okay
dimethyltryptamine is the most potent
psychedelic known to man incredibly
potent drug that is just intensely
hallucinatory gives you these insane
visions and it also is proof this here's
a Jaguar it's really crazy and this is
in the Amazon these Jaguars eat these
plants and these plants are they have
the ingredients of ayahuasca and these
Jaguars are known to eat these things
and then trip their fucking balls off
they eat them and there are pupils
dilate and they roll over on their back
and stare at the sky I mean they're
clearly high right so this is something
oh you're gonna say yeah this is what
I'm gonna say so this is what what
ayahuasca is is dimethyltryptamine like
it's kind of cool watching this Jaguar
trip balls yeah they just stare they see
shit that's not their I mean or it is
their maybe they're still traveling it's
amazing
so what ayahuasca is is there's
dimethyltryptamine which is this
incredibly potent psychedelic drug is
produced in the human body it's produced
by the liver it's produced by the lungs
and they also believe it's produced by
the pineal gland which is literally your
third eye the pineal gland in certain
reptiles actually has a rep retina in a
lens I mean it's like an eyeball and
they think in the Egyptians called it
the seat of the soul and they think that
this is one of the reasons why they have
this obsession with this gland in
Eastern mysticism is somehow or another
they figured out that this is the gland
that produces this incredibly potent
psychedelic drug this psychedelic drug
dimethyltryptamine also exists in
thousands of different plants the
problem is when you consume in orally
your body produces something in your gut
called monoamine oxidase mono AMI and
oxidase breaks it down so what these
indigenous people figured out is how to
combine one plant which contains this
psychedelic compound with another plant
which contains a natural MAO inhibitor
called harmine so they brew this all
together much like they did with the
cassava but we wondered no idea how they
figured that out right they brew this
stuff up together and they create this
psychedelic tea called ayahuasca and
ayahuasca now they have all these trips
where people go down to Peru and take
this stuff and trip to fucking balls off
and this this the combination of these
things
leads to this incredibly potent Trench
really transformative experience which
is impossible to describe and that this
this psychedelic drug why did I bring
that up what was what we're talking
about how maybe jimpson are these early
ancestors did something similar which
pushed them along this path is starting
to completely I get to DM 2 what did I
get the ayahuasca a couple of links in
that JT is because of animals that get
high that's that's what it was so this
is
this that's exactly what it was it was
yeah the Jaguar getting high on DMT so
that's what they think that Jaguars
doing this is the Jaguar consuming this
stuff it's making him trip on DMT and
EMTs I mean it's fun it's really
exciting and so it's so Robert Rivers is
wonderful biologist who started a lot of
the kinds of work that we're talking
about going in the 70s calls these sorts
of things of phenotypic indulgence right
so evolution gave you these pleasure
centers in your brain so that you do
what's in your genes best interests and
kill the animal or get the girl or
whatever and that makes you feel good
and so we tend to like the things that
are good for us and dislike the things
that are bad for us we don't want to eat
feces we do on eat a steak so there's
cases like this where it's short
circuits that it goes right to the
pleasure center even though what it's
doing is kind of irrelevant but this is
a case where maybe it wasn't irrelevant
maybe it actually caused these animals
to then change the way that they behave
to become more sociable right it's very
possible something like that played a
role along the way which is why if you
replay the sequence of The Vanishing
rainforest ten times only one time does
it maybe lead to anything good and the
other nine times it leads to a bunch of
dead chimps mmm yeah well the the
process is probably incredibly slow
right over a millions of years of the
climate did alter what's right so you
got millions of years for the rainforest
to disappear so you got these animals to
slowly slowly say I got no choice
slowly figure it out and then I I think
for three-and-a-half million years
literally there was skulking around the
edges and and they figured nothing out
but there was a pressure on them to walk
upright and nobody knows for sure what
that pressure is one hypothesis that has
some possible there's probably a lot of
reasons right anytime something big
happens it's probably a lot of causes so
some people have said that you can cover
ground more efficiently when you walk
upright with fewer calories and
especially this idea of slowly running
down animals you may have heard about
this notions persistence hunting exactly
we talked about that yesterday huh
and so um but another reason is so ask
yourself so why would an animal so if we
back up a little bit remember I talked
about how Oldowan tools which are made
even later than when we first started
walking upright so they're even after
that Oldowan tools are never carried at
any great distance from where they were
quarried and made and so what you have
is an animal just like today's chimps
they can't plan for
tomorrow so chimp can plan for needs
that it currently feels it can say oh I
want to go get termites out of that
Mound all break the stick off I'll strip
the leaves and then I'll go over there
and do that but it can't plan for the
fact that it might have that need again
tomorrow if it doesn't feel the need to
can't plan for it and humans can plan
for unfelt needs and the best example of
that is the notion of taken a tool with
you that you've now used and saying well
I'll want to use it again tomorrow right
so whichever also a Pittacus was the
first one to start walking upright was
almost assuredly incapable of planning
for the future for unfilled needs but it
could plan for filt knees because a
chimp can do that too and if you think
about how would you feel if you're about
to walk across the open savanna and
you're kind of small and leopards and
lions are way fast and you I think the
primary thing you'd feel is fear like oh
shit I'm gonna detect and so I want
something in my hands to help me defend
myself
mmm a spear a club stick something right
and so I what I suspect it's a part of
the process is my desire to hold
something in my hand as I'm looking
around and I'm scared and a bunch of us
are doing that and so I suspect that
that's what led to played a role in
leading to bipedalism there would have
been other factors at play like
persistence hunting and stuff but I
suspect that came later so whole
actually holding a weapon might have led
to the beginning of yeah
yeah sure just because you you don't
need to be a rocket scientist you're
scared now you want something to defend
yourself do we have evidence of them
sharpening sticks remember so modern
chimps who live on the Savannah do
sharpen sticks
modern chimp yeah but do we have
evidence of ancient man and we don't
have any sound we don't even have sticks
leftover fractus we know they must use
them because they're making some pretty
complicated stones and so surely they
were sharpening sticks but all of its
decayed so what year did we so we really
don't know when they first started
attaching these stone tools to sticks
right all weaking axes right Spears um
we know that that's happening very
recently by homo sapiens we don't know
if it happened before that right if I
had to guess I would say that homo
erectus did that if you look at the
quality of other things that they've
done so for example there's this amazing
site off the Sea of Galilee it's about
700 thousand years old so remember human
Homo sapiens let's call it 300,000 years
mm-hmm so now we're 700 thousand or so
years ago and there's this elephant
skull
that's been turned over so that they can
get access trains yeah friends yeah
that's that thing is unwieldy it's heavy
as anything you got to have people
working together to turn that thing over
there's even a log underneath it that
might have been used as a lever that's
kind of help plop the thing over so what
you got is people are quite capable of
working together they know what they
trying to achieve they know how to
access those things I I suspect that
they knew that they could sharpen a
stick or maybe even have to put a stone
to make it even better it's just that we
can't find any evidence for that least
not yet you wasn't there some there was
certain really ancient evidence of
cannibalism too because of the scrape
marks inside of skulls and they think
they were scooping out brain matter
that's possible I haven't seen those
data but absolutely you can see where
they've used those tools on like the
legs of animals and things like that so
you would see it inside the skull as
well a human skull that I'm sure you're
aware of that little person that was
discovered just a few years ago I think
it was like a decade or so ago that on
Indonesia on the floor is yeah yeah they
think that little person type thing used
two stone tools right yes those guys so
so remember there so what happened about
a one-point X million years ago we'll
call it 1.7 I don't remember exactly
Homo erectus leaves Africa but they also
stay so you got Homo erectus basically
colonizing all of Africa right and
you've got Homo erectus colonizing
almost all of Europe all of southern
Asia and so they don't they don't go
beyond that at least not to our
knowledge maybe they did but but they
certainly covered all that ground and
and outside of so now you've got Homo
erectus in Africa and Homo erectus
outside of Africa and of course then
over time both of them are going to
evolve and change the ones outside of
Africa end up as in the Endor Thals
those are the most recent recent
instantiation of them the ones inside of
Africa end up as us and so when we leave
Africa the first thing we encounter is
Neanderthals in Arabia because that's
the first point of entry out of Africa
and so we probably started copulating
with them there we know we started
copulating with them soon afterward so
as we left they had evolved somewhere
else that evolved in Europe and Asia
yeah yeah and so they evolved from some
other type well the same ancestors so
our okay our great-uncle left and our
great-grandpa stayed right and so the
ones who left some of them evolved into
those people on Flores into those tiny
little people some of them
we know this Denisovan from a pinkie
bone you know in a cave inside yeah yeah
and and we have got we know that we
interbred with Neanderthals and that
that's where a lot of our genes that we
currently have for light skin and blue
eyes and things like that come from and
they think wewe interbred with the
Denisovans as well right well not all of
us so there's some there's evidence for
Melanesians if I remember I having
Denisovan blood our DNA I don't I don't
know about us it may turn out that we
did I don't think so though but there's
no evidence that humans interbred with
the folks from Flores right not that I
know I've never seen that they're tiny
yeah they're very small they're like
Hobbit like now that doesn't mean that
if if well no we know it's possible that
we could have overlapped with them if
somebody would do it yeah so like we hit
we hit Australia by 65 thousand years
ago and I don't remember when the floors
people we hit Australia 65 thousand
years ago Wow and that was through some
sort of boat traveling yeah remember so
65 thousand years ago would have still
been Ice Age and so we would have had a
lot less water right so if you if you
look at topographical maps then when you
look at what the Pacific Islanders
didn't stuff it seems ballsy as hell but
it's a little less ballsy when you can
keep seeing the next piece of land not
not as far away compared to now where
the sea is much higher and you can't see
the land okay so when the Pacific
Islanders like traveled to Hawaii you
think they could see things yeah they
can see a lot better now the most recent
at the very last place the Pacific
Islanders settled in New Zealand that's
only seven hundred years ago so that's
the same as today right but but a lot of
that discovery was done at a time where
the sea was a lot lower and so there'd
be a lot more island sticking up that we
don't currently so 700 years ago they
had much more sophisticated boats
yeah they had those awesome yeah
breakers and all that right yeah it is
crazy when you think about like we're
like little rats with the way we've
scattered across this globe yeah and and
if you if you think about it it seems
like it's all ballsy exploration but I
actually suspect a bigger part of it is
running away from the guy behind you
who's causing problems and so my
favorite example that is if you look at
the cliff dwellings like in the American
Southwest and you go there and take a
note that would live like this I mean
you know when jr. walks out there
but if the people down the valley are
scarier than the risk of falling outside
you came you're gonna live up in a cave
dwelling right we're gonna climb up to
get ya and that's part of the remember
we talked about sexual selection as a
source of people don't like unfairness
well people also don't like unfairness
between groups because if you and I make
a deal and you know I'm from Ohio and
you're from California and the
Californians benefit more than the
Ohioans even though I benefit you
benefit more and now I'm at risk because
maybe your group you know ancestrally
it's gonna cause my group problems
interesting so when you're studying all
this stuff how does that make you feel
as a person do you mean do you do did
you ever internalize all this stuff when
you're thinking about like all the weird
ape-like creatures that turned into
people and all the thousands and
thousands of years of evolution and how
it could have gone left and it did go
right and does that freak you out when
you really get deep into the study of
all this stuff it first of all I do this
all the time right so it does freak me
out but it's what I like and it also we
can talk about all the ways that you can
predict things about our modern cells
based on knowing these things in the
past right but secondarily what freaks
me out the most probably is the enormous
role of random chance in all this right
and so if you think about the I mean
just think about our own backgrounds the
random chance that our mom and dad got
amorous the night that they did made you
and me if if they did a different
position maybe your brother's talking to
my brother right yeah it's so it's
really which sperm wins that race is so
unlikely to be us right and so every
roll of the dice has to go your way
right and so the the role of chance in
all this kind of freaks you out if you
think about that yeah but at the same
time your brother's probably a lot like
you my brother's probably a lot like me
or my sister or whatever and so you have
one child or you have more I've got a
boy a girl okay yeah well you know then
that they're so different right out of
the box
yeah they are totally really weird it is
weird so I don't know if you saw this
book that Plomin just wrote called
blueprint Robert Plomin he's a
behavioural geneticist I haven't seen
that oh it's a lovely book just came out
and just out like really yeah like a
month or two at the most
PLO mi and Robert Plomin and he's a
wonderful behavior of geneticist over
in the UK and this book blueprint talks
about the role of genes and all this and
he he basically is one of these people
who's been in the field almost since it
got started and and what they kept
thinking is that the environment was
gonna play a huge role the parents were
gonna play a huge role but of course
what they keep finding over and over
again
there he goes how Danny makes us who we
are and and what they find over and over
again and this was so disconcerting is
first of all on average most things are
about 50% genetic but the bummer is that
the other half isn't and isn't what's
happening in your house and the way you
brought up by your folks it's the random
other stuff like the first we don't even
know what it is it's just it's what we
call unshared environment maybe that
first girlfriend you had maybe you biked
into a tree and you unimproved your face
you know a million different things that
specifically happened to you that didn't
happen to everybody else in your family
right and also the way you address those
things that happened yeah and that could
have a factor it could be a factor in
how you were raised and how you were
taught to deal with stress how you were
taught to deal with situations and
wealth after development but all the
data suggests not it suggests parents
just don't matter how you were taught
doesn't seem to play a role because when
we parse up all the different traits
about you there's a few that your
parents actually have a big influence on
it what religion you're in for example
but not how religious you are so the
biggest role that you can play seems to
be when spermatic it's a friend of mine
the analogy they made when when I when I
had my first kid is he says here's what
you're gonna find out that you're handed
when the baby's born you're handed a
negative it's the pictures already been
taken you can screw it up by being in
the darkroom a little bit wrong or you
can help it a little bit by being in the
darkroom a little bit right
but the photograph is already there and
my son and my daughter are wildly
different in some ways in some ways are
quite similar but I feel like I'm along
for the ride more than I feel like I'm
shaping them to make them who they are
but don't you think you're shaping them
somewhat I'm trying look that's what we
do right but the data say no well but
how would the data know I mean how would
you so here's how we do have to study so
many different human beings you have to
you have to take into account all the
variables that took place during all the
developmental periods of their life
well the you to do it right you need to
do all that and we can't do that yet and
to do it right what you want is actually
to have that
the actual genetic markers not just to
know the genes of their right and that's
all starting now but but we don't know
yet what they do do is they'll say well
we got a bunch where there's two ways to
go about this employment was at the
front of both of them one you look at
adoptive studies versus kids were
adopted into a family versus biological
and you can compare the parents of the
adopted kids to the biological parents
versus the home parents and it turns out
that the biological parents predict a
whole lot more about the adopted child
and the parents who raised them mmm the
parents were raised and predict almost
nothing whoa
I know and then the second thing you can
do is you can look at fraternal versus
monozygotic identical twins and you find
that when you then they all share the
same environment they're all brought up
by you and me right were the parents of
these kids but they also there's a lot
of unshared environment and that's when
they differ it's not because of you and
me we can't find any evidence that you
and me that you and I made any
difference all we can find is evidence
that other things in their life made a
difference now to say that means what we
really don't know is well what is that
unshared environment all we know is it's
not something about your household
because that would cause fraternal and
identical twins to both be more similar
to each other right and it doesn't well
and obviously a lot there's not a lot of
data in terms of when you're measuring
someone's entire life from birth to
death we know no but there's there's
enough that people are starting to draw
conclusions one of the more interesting
ones is when you see identical twins
that were raised in different households
without any knowledge of each other yeah
and then they run into each other thirty
years later and they find out they have
disturbing similarities is that's
exactly another example and what's also
interesting about it which Blauman talks
about in blueprint is that your genes
become more powerful as you age
so the heritability of things like IQ
goes up as you get older and so the
argument is that your genes seem to be
causing you to select out environments
so you gave the example well maybe the
way that you discipline them or tell
them to be resilient or whatever you do
as a parent causes them to shape their
environment it doesn't seem to be the
case but it does seem to be the case
that that genes that you give them cause
them to select their environments in
certain ways because remember kids
choose their friends right mm-hmm you
want them to play with Timmy but they
want to play with
right that's that's the unshared
environment they're making those choices
every day it's also the case that their
peers matter a whole lot more than their
parents do once they get to a certain
age you know I'm chopped liver as soon
as my kids are a bit older but when I'm
young I'm their hero
right yes now when you say that your
genes become more powerful as you get
older what do you mean by that though
well they they are more predictive of
the outcome and so if you look at the
heritability of IQ when you're a kid
it's lower than when you're an adult and
it's lower still than when you're an
older adult and so what seems to be
happening to a lot of our traits
probably almost you sure are you saying
that like if you have children as an
older person it's inevitable as the kids
get older sorry okay so is it so if you
look at the heritability of IQ when kids
are 2 4 8 10 20 60 you find that
identical twins come more and more
together as they age whether they're
aging in the same household or not and
so there's it's something about
selecting your environments so like
here's one kid who loves to think and do
puzzles and it's identical to and loves
to do the same and they kind of get
smarter their whole lives
here's another kid who's not interested
in that they have other interest and
they go in a different direction but
when you're when you're the parent you
can be busily pushing them to do the
things you want them to do right and so
there heritability is less strong and
there's there's lots of cool examples
it's like when totalitarian governments
are eliminated and the school system
becomes more fair heritability of
intelligence goes up in those societies
because kids are now more capable of
selecting the schools they want to go to
the environments that they want to be
part of wow we're so flexible it's so
weird when you think about all the the
various styles of civilization that
human beings exist in and thrive in
right and for me that's the key so when
a lot of people hear about this they
sort it sounds like genetic determinism
that your genes are forcing you to be a
certain way but for me it's theirs it's
nothin etic determinism but you can
think of about as a genetic nudge part
of your nudge is gonna come from the DNA
your inherited but part of it's gonna
come from the environment and part of
its gonna come from your own personal
decisions yeah so in my mind we talk
about in terms of your mind because
that's what psychology but an easier
example is your muscles you know some
people inherit genes that if they lift
one weight once but they're not they're
both other people's genes they have to
workout a lot if they want to gain
anything but you can still decide I'm
gonna
work out a lot or I'm not I'm gonna eat
these nutrients or you know a lot of
protein or not um you can choose a
lifestyle that leads you to be more
muscular or less so it's partially
choice it's partially environment it's
partially that interaction between your
genes in environment which would make
sense if you think about how flexible we
are absolutely it has adaptive that we
are it has to be because human beings
have to learn how to survive in every
environment on this planet if we were
meerkats or something well we got a
certain way of doing things and you your
genes can basically tell you what to do
and with meerkats there's some really
interesting experiments where you can
show your genes cause you to listen to
one signal and just follow that but as
human beings your genes have no choice
but to give up control once we went down
this cognitive pathway that emphasizes
learning over inborn instincts you know
you've had little ones you know they're
worthless when they're babies right baby
wildebeest gets up and off it can go it
run away from a lion yeah it's just so
fantastically complicated the the
developmental process from birth to
adulthood and that this is taking place
simultaneously amongst hundreds and
hundreds of millions of people and with
varying results and all sorts of
different levels of creativity and
ingenuity and mathematical prowess and
literature and all these different
things that are being created by all
these different weird little ape
creatures everywhere and there's so many
different factors that determine what
this ape creature becomes right and
that's one of the best things in my mind
about being a person so if like if
you're a dung beetle you got one job in
life push a ball of poo and if you can't
push a ball of poo that's three times
your body weight well that's the end of
the line for you right but if you're a
human maybe you're big and strong maybe
you're a lot maybe you're really smart
maybe you're not maybe you're really
creative you know there's a million ways
to skin that cat and and the great thing
about being in the human is that any if
you're good at any of those things
there's a niche for you you will be
beneficial and because we evolved to all
work together they'll be valuing you
you're my favorite barista you're my
favorite whatever whatever you're good
at and everybody's good at something and
so the thing is that people worry about
this sort of upcoming genetic revolution
that it's going to be well there's gonna
be the good and everybody else and
that's just not gonna happen
because one of the things that we know
and you'll see this if you look at
blueprint is that you have a gazillion
genes underlie every trait there aren't
five smart
Jeanne's there's like a thousand of them
and furthermore each one of them only
accounts for a tiny tiny bit and they do
lots of other things too so you can't
like design you can't make a design or
baby that has all these qualities
because all you do is noodle around with
five or six genes there's a couple of
disorders that work that way but our
personalities our abilities our
proclivities are all heavily determined
by large numbers of genes that do lots
and lots of different things we're
talking about our understanding of
genetics currently yes and when you talk
about things like genetic manipulation
or the use of CRISPR or any of these
maybe new tools that they're working on
right now they've already updated CRISPR
they were CRISPR point two right yeah
when when this continues to evolve and
and more and more innovation takes place
in in that world don't you think they're
gonna get to a point where they're gonna
understand all the various factors in
genetics and they're gonna be able to
create a person who looks like Thor yes
and no so in principle yes you've got
like I don't know three billion base
pairs in your DNA and most of those we
all share all the same ones so screw the
ones that are shared we don't care about
those all we can do is noodle around
with the ones that aren't now what makes
it complicated is that most of the ones
that differ between people are actually
none there in what we now call the
regulatory region we used to think of as
junk DNA but now we know well think
about a company a company that makes
widgets doesn't just make widgets has to
have sales veste marketing as to
management and now we know well sure
enough a lot of the DNA that's not
coding for proteins is working with the
other DNA to turn things on and turn
things off and there's three billion
base pairs so their level of complexity
there is outrageous right so but let's
still but someday we'll get it right
okay it's not you and I won't see it and
and what we now know from these studies
jiwa studies genome-wide Association
studies is that you can look at all the
very base pairs at very and you can say
all right which one of these things are
correlate with my outcome of interest
and so you say Oh education and they
create what's called a polygenic score
and you say let's predict how many years
of education you're gonna get and sure
enough the richer you are on average the
higher your polygenic score is you're
born into a rich family you probably
have a higher polygenic score but if
you're polygenic score for education is
lower than then the average for your
thing you probably
get poorer across your life if it's
higher you probably get richer is it a
gene for being smart for sitting there
and doing what you're told for self
control like it could be and there's a
thousand things in there and each one of
them accounts for 1/10 of 1% of the
variance but what makes it complicated
is that whole set of genes also predicts
how artistic you are but in a different
combination and it predicts how friendly
you are in a different combination and
so the genes that do one set of things
almost always do lots of things and we
have very few traits at all that don't
have lots and lots of genes that each
play a tiny role underneath them the
example Plomin gives in his book which i
think is great he says we started out
looking for gold nuggets and we now
realize we're looking for gold dust it's
just lots of tiny stuff out there so in
many ways when you're looking at a 1 you
know you talk about the the the human
genome and our genetic code we're really
similar to computer programs and that
there's millions and millions of lines
of code in computer programs but we know
how to make computer programs so we know
like what these well we don't somebody
smarter than both of us knows how to
make these rattle but she knows that
lead to operating systems and but now
we're writing codes that we don't
understand so if you look at neural
networks
they'll be input levels and they'll be
output levels and the freaking computer
decides how to mix those things together
and we don't even know what the hell
it's done and two of them that are
learning the same thing might get there
via different mechanisms so by that the
idea or with it through that idea
wouldn't you think that artificial
intelligence could lead to the mapping
out of the human genome or rather the
altering of the human genome mapping out
a different type of human look in
principle it could and and it may when
all I would say is that you that what we
thought though is that there'd be five
smart genes that really matter and the
rest are trivial and so turn on those
five smart ones everybody's gonna want
that right and there'll be five funny
genes and we'll turn those on you know
etc but there's not and so what that
means is I got to decide imagine this
future world where I'm about to have a
baby and I can CRISPR the whole thing
and I have to decide what genes I'll say
well I can make him smarter but then
he's not going to be very friendly you
know right or whatever right they all
trade off against each other right you
could get the big dick gene but it
doesn't see it
give them glasses exactly and so the
thing is that it makes it so yeah we
will get rid of thing the single gene
disorders that are awful right but but
we're not gonna I suspect we're not
gonna noodle around with our smarts and
our personality because every single
change we make is gonna have a commence
or change somewhere else oh well I can
make him smarter but then he's gonna be
depressed and he's you know like that
yeah that that is a boy the the idea of
playing God like that I mean that's
that's really I mean we are playing
creator you know I don't even
necessarily think we should use the word
God in that respect because it's
something that's already been created
but we're taking this life-form and
radically altering it and we can already
do that and people won't start doing it
soon and we like when I was a kid when
we were kids IVF is playing God mm-hmm
now it's a triviality right that is
crazy
what we're you know do you don't think
that this is going to take place in our
lifetime to move Russia or China is
gonna make some super person not there's
there's too many genes that play too
small of a role and so the thing is that
the it it's too hard to mess around with
it's too hard to make the to create
these things
there's no reason you'd be a lot better
off if you just did selective breeding
and the reality is you don't even need
to people already assorted of lis mate
they already choose partners who are
similar to themselves if they value
education the other person does too if
they value athletics the other person
does too
that works so much better than anything
that we're capable of doing right now
and when you do these G Wells studies
with these polygenic scores and you say
oh look you're born into a social class
and suggests to do it probably behind
yours kind of low and sure enough you
get poorer across your life
you're literally accounting for 3% of
the variance you're barely explaining
anything because even though we when we
look at the behavioral genetic studies
we can say wow intelligence is 50
percent genetic we can't come close to
finding the genes that actually do that
and and part of the reason we don't know
but part of the reason may be that first
of all its course is 50% environmental
and what those random things are we
don't know and second think about how
you with 3 billion base pairs how many
things maybe when those two are in place
and that one isn't in the third you know
you could be interactions that really
really complicated levels where you're
almost dead infinite right and so that's
why I don't think it happens when
you and I around to see it I think
you're probably right but then I just
realized that things like CRISPR which
were invented by accident who came out
of nowhere less than a decade ago I
believe was less than a decade ago right
it's super recent it's outside yeah and
then if you really stop and think about
even the mapping of the human genome it
used to be an unbelievably difficult
thing yeah and then you know checking
your genetics was preposterous ly
expensive now you just spit into a
little to end of the 23andme and they
they tell you hey bro you know someone's
family is from Europe and this guy's
from Asia and yeah yeah and so I could
easily be wrong that you and I will see
it and it's only ten years away yeah
because computationally it seems so hard
right now but things that were
computationally impossible and I was in
grad school you know that the simple
analyses we did with our data in grad
school it's just like a phone could do
that so easily now when we waited 24
hours for the mainframe to give it back
to us
what Kurzweil talks about that that we
really don't see things in terms of the
exponential increase in technology you
know Kurzweil believes all this is gonna
happen plus more he thinks you're gonna
be able to download your brain into a
computer and you know and he supported
ourselves he's smarter than me I don't
know if he's smarter than you he's
definitely smarter than me and his idea
is research has just turned on the
world's most powerful supercomputer
designed to mimic a human brain whoa I
think I was telling you about a week it
last week morphic computer neuromorphic
computer just got a big boost with a
million core supercomputer that took
over a decade to build mother yeah this
is the beginning of a movie right right
doesn't go well but here's the thing
right this movie in this movie this is a
whole room full of computers just like
the Apollo missions used a room full of
computers that can't fuck with your
phone really crazy
that's 1965 66 67 right they had a room
this iPhone buries that room full of
fucking shitty ass computers and plus it
takes pictures
do you remember one of your kids and
everybody said everyone will have their
own phone right I never thinking who the
hell wants a phone like my mom will just
reach me wherever I go you didn't know
what a phone could do in those used to
have a bit and this is only from 2005
from a Netflix special I did
2005 which you know it's 13 years ago
but doesn't seem like that long ago but
I was making fun of people texting
uh-huh because I was like hey bro why
why are you making me read call me I go
you're sending the text from a phone a
fucking call me takes you four presses
to get an S yeah and then that was also
back when people thought it was cool to
have those walkie-talkies those Nextel
phones do you remember that there that
was like a big deal to have a walkie
talkie and a phone that died out
thankfully but this this whole change in
the way we view technology from 2005 to
2008 een the world is a radically
different place and the funny thing is
that you and I both make a living by
observing the human condition right
that's our job and we both get it wrong
constantly right every day you got that
the texting what the hell is that I
remember my sister showed me Facebook
cuz she was in an NGO and they're using
it to keep track of each other I was
like yeah people don't want to do that
shit every time every single time I
follow quite a few people on Facebook
that are nuts and I go to their pages
just to see what kind of arguments are
getting into like as a sociological
experiment and there are people that are
on Facebook arguing about Trump or
abortion or Islam or you know fill in
the blank environmental concerns
fracking and they just fucking argue all
day long it's fascinating you look at
their timeline you look at the entries
and you're like oh my god this there's
like 10 hours of this shit in a day and
they just do it all day long and you
just picture this sweaty person sitting
in front of a computer arguing with the
world I never would have thought that
that there'd be people sitting in front
of their desk arguing with people that
they can't see all throughout the world
who thought that right who thought that
would be fun I don't think it is funny I
think it's an impulsive obsessive thing
that people get sucked into and I think
they're vastly healthier and happier
when they're not engaged in it yeah well
I mean the truth of the matter is and
this comes back to the past again so you
we talked about all these differences
so one of the really lovely things that
you can do is look for the past and then
say well how does that manifest itself
today and one of my favorite examples is
the whites to your eyes so chimpanzees
have brown eyes the the sclera round the
cornea yeah ours are white why would you
do that well that advertises the
direction of your gaze why would you
advertise the direction of your gaze
because what that says is that on
average as a human when I look over
there and see something I want you to
know that I saw it you and I are
probably going to cooperate to help us
achieve whatever the goal is that I just
encountered a chimp wants to hide it
from its fellow chimps because it's
competitive right on average whatever
the hell's over there you're not gonna
help me get it right yeah exactly you're
gonna make it harder for me to get it
yeah the chimps ever do though hmm
amazing Laura Jamie oh girl huh
amazingly groupers and octopi hunt
together and they do that
whoa groupers and octopi work together
that so the grouper will be over the
Great Barrier Reef and the fish has gone
in and he goes to the octopus and he
goes right there no reason he doesn't
give a shit about the octopus of course
but if the octopus goes to get it and
doesn't get it it's gonna come out and
the groupers got it well cooperation
always works better than working on your
own right Wow so is there real evidence
it shows that the whites of our eyes
developed in order to indicate which way
we're looking well in all these cases
all we can just say let's do a little
phylogenetic analysis who's got it and
who doesn't we're the only great ape
with whites to their eyes so 90 so we're
gonna look at this here's an octopus
that's chilling and is that a grouper
yeah it's a weird-looking fan since
about it I guess I don't know if it
really pretty looks like a coral trout
to me oh man so what do I know
look how pretty that octopus is - yeah
they're really fucking love octave and
they can change colors like that I know
yeah we've gone down massive rabbit
holes with these things for hours at a
time look at this changing right now as
we're watching him so he's sitting there
waiting and the fish tries to get out
and the other fish got you yeah that's
fine and so it's really cool the way
they have the good sense to work
together look at the octopuses mad it's
getting dark gore has a yard how cool
his skin is how it just changes and
morphs as you're looking at it that is
so bizarre what a crate I didn't you
know I didn't know that they could do
this until my friend Remy war
came on the podcast and he had a
television show called apex predator and
what in on the show they would study the
various ways these animals would hunt
and the way they would you know all
their the different adaptation to their
environment all the different ways that
they would use the environment and and
he would try to mimic those different
ways and one of the things that they
studied was octopus and what's that
other fish that's like it the cuttlefish
which is also the octopus is using a
clam shell what is he doing he's
lounging they found that he picked it up
oh my god there's a BBC this is crazy
oh my god the octopus is climbing inside
a clamshell and then he closes it that
is bananas there's a BBC blue planet
where it shows the octopus picking up
all that random shrapnel when there's a
shark coming after it and it covers
itself like a big ball and the shark
keeps going wow they're super smart
octopi well they eat sharks you ever see
that one there was a video where they
found this aquarium was having an issue
where sharks were disappearing they
couldn't figure out what was going on
and they put a camera inside the
aquarium but it turned out that the
octopus was waiting just chilling on the
rocks till the sharks came by and they
would snatch them and eat them watch
this it's really cool to watch he's like
doo-doo-doo who me don't bother with me
I'm just a piece of coral I'm just
hanging out here being cool bitch that's
you like in cuz he looks exactly yeah
even in texture like the coral which is
so fascinating but when they found this
they were stunned they had no idea that
octopus could do that could not only
that they could do that but that they
would eat a shark and that's a big fight
fuck man it's not though you want to
squeeze his mouth shut first but it's an
easy fight it looks like he's the thing
about octopus though too they could
sacrifice a tentacle and it just grows
back yeah sorry there really no big deal
it's annoying but yeah yeah
I don't know it's annoying I mean we're
just guessing right so there's a
fascinating animal there's a rich
twisted them up there's an amazing case
in Australia where a Coulomb brown as a
biologist had cuttlefish in his tank and
they can signal they like an octopus I
can do whatever color and in this tank
he's got a bunch of females on one side
a bunch of males on the other so male
goes in between them and he signals to
different sides of his body he shows the
females he's male but he shows the males
that he's female so they won't attack
him for a sideline out to the female
it's weird it's weird that they split
off from us hundreds of millions of
years ago right like it's closely
related to celery bass yeah that's crazy
but they're so smart and their eyes are
similar to ours and like in the
development actually it's the opposite
so they're our eyes are poorly designed
there's a very well designed so our eyes
have all the detecting stuff is in its
own way it's backwards and so the light
comes in and has to pass all the
cellular bodies before I can get picked
up by the detectors theirs aim in the
proper direction so the shit isn't in
the way and we have this blind spot
because the big thing the the nerve
connection they don't there's comes in
from the back where it belongs
so what that tells you is that yeah we
both started out with some kind of
randoms
light-sensitive spot and there's happen
to work much better if you want to turn
it into an eyeball than ours did because
evolution can always it only can start
with what you got right but deserves
work better because they can see in
water I mean is that well no I mean
because there I think it's purely random
that they don't we do a great job of
getting rid of the cellular bodies that
are in our way so what your eye does is
it Wiggles all the time and so if
anything's retinal stationary it's
wiggling and equally with your eyeball
you ignore it and so you don't even know
you have your own blind spot you fill it
in your brain does amazing things to fix
the problem if you have a piece of lint
on your eye or something yeah if it
we're literally attached to Vince she
would disappear mhm and because your
brain says oh that's irrelevant
um and so you can't see your own blind
spot unless you close one eye and then
you sit there with a neutral background
you move your thumb across and literally
your thumbnail disappears because that
spot is just being filled in by whatever
the background and what happens with the
octopus it doesn't have that problem
because our nerve anding creates a blind
spot by being on the wrong side there's
comes in from the back and so the whole
thing works beautifully there
have to deal with the blind spots would
that be as effective though in the world
that we live in yeah it's a watery or
irrelevant it's purely a happenstance
that with the light-sensitive pit that
they had started to get innovated
properly from the back and ours didn't
and then as ours evolved into an eye I
mean of course we don't know this is
just
but as ours evolved too and I we just
had to find ways around the problem that
all the fancy structures that we now
need in front of it are in the way does
anything have an eye like an octopus
that lives on land great question I
don't know I don't think so
see I've read something about eyes that
they think that I got shit information
no you're pregnant memory that they have
an amazing memory all these shows that
you still throw away that's too many
shows man I don't have any memory
anymore so it's like full yeah I've like
I'm like a hoarder like my house is
filled with boxes of shit that I don't
need
that's how brains work I'm afraid our
brains work yeah I mean it must be
because like I know that there's a lot
of stuff in there that didn't used to be
in there before but I also know like
it's like random people that I should
remember that I don't remember yeah well
then the funny thing about brains is we
may never forget anything but we just
lose our capacity to access it right but
the data suggested it may still guide
our behavior and so every single
experience you ever had may still be in
there and it guides your behavior but
but it's use it's annoying for you to
recall it cuz it gets in the way of what
you want and so when we talk about
forgetting what we're actually talking
about is being able to actually retrieve
it and talk about it not to have it
guide with our action well also I can I
could retrieve things far better if I
get access to the file by someone else's
memory so like if you and I had an
experience like 10 years ago we went on
a camping trip or something like that
and I forgot something that happened and
you said do you remember what happened
by the creek when Mike for hurt his foot
I'm like oh yes exactly
oh my god I forgot about that and then
you know it's of this memory right and
so what we've done is you've broken
access in yeah and so but if you you
could literally find the sneakers
wearing oh holy crap right we're in this
you know and so that's how our brain is
designed it it's it's annoying to
retrieve when you're looking for one
thing to retrieve everything yes if it's
important or happened recently it
probably should be retrieved if it's not
let it sit away and it'll still guide
your baby you won't put your foot in
that same hole when you and Mike go on
the camping trip the next time
but you won't even remember why right
and unlikely significant lessons are
important because they're seared in your
memory of this is uh this is a
significant point where you figured
something out
that you didn't know before and it
changed the way you looked at the world
so this is seared in your memory yeah
and so when emotions get involved you
tend to have it's much more easily
retrieve because your brain is saying
yeah that's our evolution or whatever
you wanna call it it's telling you
that's important that should be
retrievable right and and what you had
yesterday for lunch
I can never retrieve that right yeah
that's one of the reasons why
epidemiology studies on diet are so
difficult because people don't remember
what the aim is they eat the same same
thing every day yeah yeah it's the human
mind is so fascinating and it varies so
much and there's so many different
factors involved and whatever it becomes
cultural factors and yeah environmental
factors dietary factors and that's all
that flexibility that we evolved to put
us in that special place that we are
yeah and so we made a deal right so we
said alright we're gonna start going
down this cognitive pathway but that
means that there's very little inborn
knowledge and that means that we're
gonna have to learn from people older
than us and people with experience there
and that means it and the best way to
learn from them is high-fidelity copying
and so if you happen to go off in the
direction where they use chopsticks well
that's how you eat you happen to go in a
fork direction that's how you eat
there's a million ways to do things and
so we started with the sort of argument
about well was it monogamy or not right
and the I'm arguing that by and large it
was monogamy because you've got these
systems in place that our testicles are
big enough we've got cryptic ovulation
which means that we can't tell when
she's fertile which means that we have
to be available sexually interested in
available all the time so we can make
sure we're the father and so that allows
her to pair bond with us and there's
some evidence that orgasm is a pair
bonding experience certainly for females
probably for males it works in lots of
animals via oxytocin and some
vasopressin all that kind of stuff right
so all that suggests that probably on
average that we evolved to do it this
way but we're so SuperDuper flexible
that when another society says well hey
these works for us off we go and we find
a way to make that work are there
studies that compare testicle size of
different civilizations and different
cultures yeah so there's a lot of
argument about this
and the problem is that the president's
racist a it's racist right that's what
underlies a lot of it but right so the
thing is that that the the genetics that
explain why one animal or one species
would have large testicles in other word
have small testicles are not the
genetics that it would explain why two
different individuals in the same
species would be that way because the
only way to make that latter one work is
you have to inherit a constellation of
traits so if I'm gonna hare the genes
for big balls and for impulsiveness and
for having lots of kids and not caring
much about them and all the things that
are supposedly go with that that do when
you look between species there's no way
for though that constellation of traits
to be inherited together because
remember I was talking about how
polygenic everything is and so they'd
all literally need to sit next to each
other on the chromosome if they've got
any chance of being passed on as a
package and they don't and you also get
all this shifting around or in meiosis I
can't remember the term for off the top
of my head but where the pieces of
genetic material move around and that
virtually guarantees you're not going to
inherit this huge constellation of
traits within a species between species
is dead easy you know your species
inherits big distil and inherits
impulsiveness it inherits you know
whatever in our strategy just reproduce
it on and ignore them you know all that
kind of stuff steady Z and so chimp
fathers don't pay any attention to chimp
babies to speak of because well that's
their mating system right whereas um
you've got pair-bonded Gibbons and
things and now parents start to play a
much bigger even male parents start to
play a bigger role but there's no
studies that show that human beings with
larger testicles tend to ignore their
children well so this is just it people
have tried to show that but here's the
problem try to show that ya studies yeah
so lots of people make that argument and
it's called life history strategies
where you say well you're gonna develop
one life history strategy in these
circumstances and another in these other
circumstances the problem is that you
end up with ethnic differences in
testicle size which we know exists and
you also have ethnic differences and
we're how in in the kinds of life's that
people currently lead the difficult
thing is it's super easy to look at the
world we are in right now and this is
what tripped me up earlier as well you
look at the world that we are right now
in assume well that's the way things
have always been and they haven't and so
right now you know the mathematics used
to for a while they're the best math in
the world was taking place in the Arabic
world
now it's not anymore and so if you but
if you don't know that past you'd say
well look people in the Arabic world
aren't as good at mathematics and they
have these qualities and then you'd make
an inference right now the ethnic
differences and testicles I believe but
I can't promise you that it's some
different West African groups happen of
the largest testicle size on average
those West African groups tend to be
poorer right now there's lots of things
about life that go with being poorer
that look like in our strategy having
lots of kids and paying less attention
to them but what you're probably looking
at is a coincidental association between
some biology and some part of some way
that your your people happen to live
that didn't exist a while ago and that
won't exist a while from now and so it's
really easy to try to use this research
which people have to say well you've got
some primitive people who have big
testicles and low parental effort and
you've got some more sophisticated
people with smaller testicles and high
parental effort but that's genetically
super naive one of the things that I
learned when I was in Rome we took a
tour of the Vatican by this guy who's a
professor it was really interesting it
was cool because we to have a really
enthusiastic guide and who could explain
a lot of things to you and he was really
excited that you know me and my family
were very curious about these things too
but one of the things that he said
what's really interesting I said ok I go
why did all the dudes have little dicks
like what's going on with that and he
said that they believed that if you had
a large penis that large penises were a
symbol of barbaric behavior and that
these were cruder people and that to be
you know thought to be a sophisticated
person you wanted a smaller penis so
they actually accentuated smaller
penises and their gods and smaller
penises in their statue and that's funny
I mean you can see these kinds of things
all the time so early pre Western
contact if you look at Japanese women
they're pinned they're painted with
their eyes as narrow of a slit as
possible post Western contact now the
women want more almond shaped eyes and
so they start painting them with the
beautiful woman have bigger eyes these
things can change all over the map I
personally suspect that large penis size
is also a product of sexual selection
it sounds more fun for her if he's got a
larger penis they're having sex for
longer and more red
because ovulation is hidden so he has to
be available all the time so she has to
be available all the time or the system
doesn't work and that's what creates
pair-bonding so humans copulate for a
very long period of time if you compare
us to the other primates with a single
exception of bonobos and we have way
bigger penises than any of the other
great apes and I suspect that that's
something that is female I mean women
always say why are men subsets to the
penis size but I suspect that they're
the creator of it and that's why we're
so obsessed with it women who say that
are playing games no that's ridiculous I
don't know that they are they're
definitely playing games
that's like men who are saying why are
women so obsessed with big breasts we
don't even care I've never had a guy who
said that there's some asshole out there
that's playing games okay possibly all
right yeah it's it is fascinating when
you think about all these different
things that lead to natural selection
and the fact that there's so many
variables that are in place and that
we're trying to find out what is better
and what is not and if you have a study
and the study finds genetic differences
in ethnic genetic differences there
there's there's a lot of blowback and a
lot of pushback yeah yes there will be
and and one of the interesting things
that we do know is if you think about
how Homo sapiens evolved in Africa and a
small percentage of us left which means
the majority of us didn't right I mean
there's few randoms who lived up in the
top right hand corner were available to
go which means that all the rest of the
earth comes out of a few small
percentage of the population that could
have left and so we now know there's
enormous genetic variation within Africa
way more genetic variation within Africa
than outside of Africa or than between
any two people lack of Chinese person
and a Norwegian person are much more
closely related to each other
genetically than an African guy who
lives in the next village over and so
because most of the genetic variability
never left the continent and so we have
this idea of race as if it has genetic
meaning and it doesn't but ethnicity
does have genetic meaning right so an
ethnic group evolved in a very certain
spot to deal with very certain problems
and their body shape will vary and you
got these West Africans who are really
jacked with these big muscle ah'd of
quick jerks my sister you don't see that
over on East
very much you've got tall people in
Denmark you don't see that you know in
other parts of Europe etc so people are
the adaptation like the Inuit to do
exactly also and lots of that's
adaptation and a lot of us just random
genetic drift to founder population
other causes that aren't evolved but
nonetheless have a big impact on what
the population ends up looking like it's
just so amazing to consider that this
entire species essentially except for
the times that we interacted with
interbred with Neanderthals came from
one part of Africa yeah you know that's
one of the reasons why racism is so
preposterous because we're essentially
all African yeah we are all African and
we've all of us were out have a little
bit of other stuff in them us but just a
tiny bit we're so weird though we're so
like we're so much like dogs you know
like a Great Dane can breed with a
poodle yeah and they don't look anything
like each other yeah we're from another
planet you go well that's definitely
that's not gonna happen it's like if you
looked at LeBron James and you know
Traci Lords right they really do and I
suspect that when we ran into the nfl's
were like oh she's kind of interesting
looking sort of hot sort of different
and so it you know first we know humans
will copulate with almost anything that
old sales right yeah and things that
aren't even alive yeah things that
aren't alive things though yeah things
that they probably shouldn't be etc but
but the end of Thal ones are interesting
because really they are cousins their
cousins separated by a million years and
some change and and we don't know too
much about them either which is really
weird we know they had larger brains
than us but we don't really know how
smart they were no and and and why did
we replace them yeah
like did we was it diseases we carried
that wiped them all out was it we were
better organized so we covered it we all
competed them we killed them on purpose
you know if there's a million ranch
species we happen to know but a lot
about Neanderthals because they are
existed till very recently but what we
there's all sorts of branching that took
place early on lots of different
australopithecines etc yeah almost all
those are dead ends yeah and you know
the fact that we're the only one that
comes out of that could mean well we got
lucky or were mean as shit and we took
care of all of our cousins who didn't
you know we wanted what they had I think
the latter yeah I don't mean well I mean
that doesn't it make sense that we were
mean as shit a million years ago we're
mean
shit exactly and what's so interesting
is you know this is something that
coming back to the point I was making
earlier about us cooperating so we
evolved to cooperate with each other but
the key is we did not evolve to
cooperate across different groups so
once you get to homo erectus and now
you've got division of labour and you've
got the capacity to plan for unfilled
needs right where they're carrying these
eschew lean tools with them over great
distances etc well now who's your most
effective predator uh you know the
occasional mammoth or saber-toothed
tiger will have killed the occasional
one of us but they can't possibly take
us on in the same way we can take them
on there's only one other thing on the
planet that can take us on and that's
ourselves so other groups of Homo
erectus would have probably been a major
threat certainly by the time we're Homo
sapiens other groups would have been our
only major threat yeah and so we evolved
to be kind to each other within our
group but we did not evolve to be kind
outside our group that doesn't mean we
evolved to be mean we evolved to be
neutral so let's see if you're gonna be
friend to foe and I'm and that
neutrality is super important yeah it
has the potential for cooperation across
group boundaries we can change women and
men can mingle so we don't interbreed
too much amongst ourselves we can trade
with each other lots of good things can
happen but the second you guys get a
little bit aggro with us you know now
we're in a position to just go all out
and try to exterminate you and so
Wrangham has he's great data Richard
Wrangham same catching fire guy shows
that if you look at the rates of
violence within human groups compared to
chimps they're like 500 times more
violent physically aggressive than we
are you look at the rates between human
groups equal they're the one-to-one
ratio so we tend to think about well how
could it be that were both so nice and
so mean but we have to remember that we
evolved to cooperate in to be nice to
each other to be more effective killers
it wasn't because let's make a hippie
you know paradise it's like shit these
lines are gonna eat us you and I gotta
have to get together to sort out these
guys and so our cooperative nature is
literally the flip side of the coin of
our competitive violent killing nature
also the undeniable history of
unbelievably ruthless tribal warfare
would indicate that we have a long
history of fighting against others that
are like us that we don't know
absolutely when when hunter gathers meet
each other and they do come into
conflict which is a huge percentage of
the time they literally fight to the
death because if you capture me you're
gonna torture me to death if
female you're gonna incorporate me into
your system and then it's gonna be okay
not great but okay but if I'm male I'm
gonna die so I might as well die
fighting you now because I'm gonna die
unpleasantly later yeah and that's super
common that's everywhere we see it and
there's tons and tons of bodies that are
have healthily perforated that that are
the clearly the consequence is this kind
of Wharf it's crazy that that is thought
to be even in 2018 an evitable part of
being human being
I mean warfare even to this day is
thought to be inevitable because there's
no I mean we would all love that one day
there would be no warfare but there's no
indication whatsoever that that's gonna
take we're not almost there and I
actually I think Pinker's got the best
answer to this question which is
basically well what structures do you
need to put in place to make the world a
safer and less violent place and and I
don't know if you've talked to him about
his book better angels of our nature I
know you've talked to him about more
recent ones but yes better angels is a
great example it's a great book it's a
great example of how we become less and
less violent and even over our lifetimes
and and part of that is undoubtedly
better governance structure and all that
but part of that I think is cycles on
itself so when I was a little kid and
this kind of thing probably happened to
you I was on when I was in kindergarten
the guy who drove our carpool was a cop
so this cop is driving me home in the
back of his car now he's got no seat
belts cuz this is 1969 and cars don't
have seatbelts right big bench seat in a
Buick or something and we'd come around
a corner and they all slide up against
me to the edge of the car seat and I'm
trying to push back but I'm this little
guy right and I can't and I hit the I
must have hit the elbow against the door
and it flies open I roll out of the car
oh man I go bouncing across the street
right so he's you know he's not gonna
ride home in two handed so of course he
goes and retrieves me from the ditch and
he brings me out and shows my mom and
I'm bleeding and bruised and torn shirt
and you know like you'd expect from
bouncing out of a car and my mom who's a
pediatrician so she could tell I wasn't
badly damaged looks at me and says ah he
looks fine don't worry about it can you
imagine somebody brought your kid home
said hey man really sorry Joe
your daughter fell out the car bounced
across the frickin street you had a
throttle them it'd be freaked out and
it's not that long ago either no this is
1969 when you and I are both on this
planet and so what I think is part of
what's what Pinker is documenting is as
the world gets safer we start getting
used to a low man
ham world yeah and and these these
mayhem events stand out in our mind and
so it actually self perpetuates where
the safer gets the safer we need it to
be because every little thing that goes
wrong stands out in sharper relief
that's a very fascinating way of looking
at it you know what's interesting to me
about Pinker's work is how much pushback
he gets and particularly about the world
being a safer place like people want to
keep putting pointing towards violent
episodes and-and-and and racism and and
crime and all these different things is
different factors as if it's some sort
of evidence against what he's saying
when he's incorporating that those
current events into this large database
and he's saying yes it's not that we
don't live in Utopia
right but the world is vastly safer and
better now than it was a thousand years
ago or ten thousand years ago or even a
hundred years ago or even thirty but why
is there so much pushback against it
well so the thing is I think what's
going on and so people worried that it
doesn't look like a problem to be solved
anymore right so when you want our kids
we both have lots of gay friends but we
didn't know it because they're not
telling anybody cuz someone's gonna kick
their ass if they knew that they were
gay now yes gay people are still
discriminated against but it's so much
better than it was then what you don't
wanna what I think people are advocates
don't want to say is well there's no
problem anymore because then you can
allow them to still run into troubles in
various circumstances even though the
trouble they run into today is a
thousand times less than the trouble
they ran to and right a little same
thing holds for racism same thing holds
for sexes and they've all gotten so much
better but and sexual violence is a
perfect example you know if you look at
if you said this is in Pinker's book a
few set rape and homicide - you call it
both of them whatever level they are in
1970 to a hundred and then you track
them through to the early 2000s homicide
in the u.s. homicides dropped down to
like 50 rapes dropped down to like 25
but if you listen to women's advocacy
groups about campus sexual assault and
stuff you'd never know that and the
reason you wouldn't know it is because
they people worry well if you think the
problems getting better on its own then
you won't keep doing anything to help
fix it and that's a really unfortunate
part of our psychology because it makes
people feel like there's been no
progress and when you feel like there's
no progress then you think well maybe we
need to completely overturn the whole
system and
something new and that's of course the
point of Pinker's newest book
enlightenment now know things are going
freaking great
turn it anarchy and all those things are
really bad ideas voting for somebody
like trumps a really bad idea because
things are actually running along really
nicely it's just that we tend to forget
it because every advocacy group who's
all worried about whatever their
particular issue is doesn't want the
word to get out that things are a lot
better than they used to be because I
think it's some fundamental level they
think well twenty five rapes here isn't
bad enough we better say that there's a
hundred you know I'm not saying they do
this consciously but of course twenty
five rapes here whatever the number is
is bad enough right it doesn't it
doesn't have to be the numbers that it
used to be when I was a child to be a
problem it all has to be is a number
above zero well there seems to the
people develop this vested interest in
promoting an idea and they want to
exaggerate that idea whatever it is
whether it's the idea that the world is
a safer place than it actually is or
whether it's the world is an idea of a
more danger more dangerous place than it
really is and for whatever reason once
we have it in our mind that this is the
thing we're married to we're married to
this concept of polyamorous life and
that this is a natural way to live or
that you know violence is inevitable and
then this is just a part of who we are
we tend to promote that and we tend to
have massive confirmation bias and it's
it's I think it's because we personally
associate ourselves with ideas we don't
look at ideas as being a thing like if
you think that something is one way and
then you're pointed towards evidence
that you're incorrect you feel like
personally you've been slighted or
you're being somehow somehow you're
being diminished by your lack of being
correct but your incorrect assumptions
and notions you're absolutely right that
is a weird and part of being a person
it's a very weird part of it being a
person it's the hardest part about being
a scientist because every good scientist
is wrong all the time
mm-hm I've been wrong already on your
show right and so it's super hard to
admit because by human nature you just
want you wanna my immediate reactions to
fight against it and not to say well
hold on what's Jo saying you know he's
right I overstated that let's back off
right and so there's this really lovely
paper that came out in 2011 by Mercier
and Dan's Berber and what they argued is
I think they nailed it and they said
here's what it is our brain actually we
evolved our logical process
singing abilities not to find out the
truth of the world but to convince you
of my point of view and so which does
our logical abilities evolved in service
of persuasion not in service of seeking
out the truth because of course if I can
persuade you that the world is the way
it would and in a way that benefits bill
that the world is you know something
about the way bill wants the world to be
is true then the world's gonna be a
little kinder to me it'll fit my
worldview and others will give me the
things I want and so I go through life
trying to persuade you of my worldview
rather than trying to find out what's
actually out there and so that's why you
think oh well smart people are gonna
fall for that no smart doesn't matter
how smart you are you you you're using
whatever brain power you have not to
define the truth but rather to find
evidence for your particular point of
view well I see I think it's also a
byproduct of ignorance because for the
longest time you could tell me something
and there was very little way that I
could find out whether or not you're
right or not
I really couldn't no you're correct
unless I went and started doing research
and read some books and whereas now I
could just pull up my phone and say hey
Bill just said this is that right and
then the phone will go no there's been a
hundred different Saturdays each other
and you go oh look motherfucker yeah I
got the stats that's true and that
definitely matters a lot it's it's the
this awesome democratization of
knowledge but if that really were all
that it was then everybody would agree
on their politics everybody would agree
that the fake news was fake and the real
news was real not necessarily because
this is a fairly recent invention but
what I'm getting at is that I think that
the ability to be deceptive was perhaps
there was an evolutionary advantage oh
absolutely yeah so that's one of the
very first things that happens when you
have theory of mind because as soon as I
realize the contents of your mind differ
from the contents of my own I say oh I
can plant something in Joe's mind
that'll help me that ain't true but if
he believes it his life will be better
for me right and so as soon as kids
learn theory of mind at age four they
start to lie prior to theory of mind
they tell the truth when it's like um
where are you you know plane I think I'm
right here dead you're supposed to keep
quiet but they can't because they don't
understand that you don't know the same
things they know right yeah and they
also understand that they could perhaps
change the way you feel about them by
manipulating truth manipulating
information yeah it's what's weird is
having kids and seeing
kids that grow up in troubled homes one
one thing you see almost universally is
if those kids lie a lot you know there's
no choice condition right yeah you're in
a bad spot and like one of my daughter's
little friends is constantly lying
that you know she has a broken home and
the situation's not good and it's just
it's unfortunate but this little kid is
tormented because of it she's always
making stuff up and all the other little
girls roll their eyes and they know
she's a liar and it's it's sad but the
ability to be deceptive I feel like that
you know this is there's some sort of
idea that we cling to that if you can
deceive someone about certain particular
aspects of your mind or your past or
what you've what you've accomplished or
what you you're capable of doing that
you will have a better place in the
social chain no that's absolutely right
and so the way I think about it is think
about the difference between cons
specific conflicts conflicts between
members of the same species and
conflicts between predator and prey so
every time predator and prey interact
eventually one of them's gonna die the
others gonna start off prey is gonna get
eaten right yeah but when conspecifics
members the same species interact and
we're competing over something even if
it's a very subtle level of competition
we don't want to come to blows because
if I'm trying to size you up be it
physical blows or mental blows we
there's suffering on eat both sides if
we have to duke it out and so I want to
sell myself as being a little more than
I really am I want to be bill plus 20%
and you want to say yourself is a little
more than you really are because we know
that we're not fully gonna test each
other because there's negative
consequences for testing and whenever
there's negative consequences even for
the winner for testing there's a lot of
posturing that's gonna go on and that
posturing is something that's literally
built into our psyche and we go through
life trying to self inflate on average
not a buddy does this but on average
trying to self inflate as much as we can
in order to gain the things in life that
we might not get if we were brutally
honest about what our capabilities
actually are that's so fascinating that
we cling to all of these ancient
structures that are in place when it
comes to the way we interact with each
other and how important it is like the
social exchanges that we have and that I
think this is one of the reasons why we
cling to ideas so much that these ideas
right if
you can push an idea through you've
you've got some sort of points on the
board yep
you've got points on the board and
probably your ideas on average are gonna
benefit you and my ideas on average
around benefit me and so if I'm if I'm
happily married in a monogamous
relationship and I'm not looking around
well then monogamy is the great thing
and sleeping around is a sin but if I'm
then it's if I'm single and I've got
opportunities well then I probably hold
alternative view some on average are
views perfectly but on average our views
serve as well and if I can plant my
views in your mind and I've benefitted
yeah I saw that a lot I mean you're glad
you see that a lot with everything but I
guess what we're talking about people
that don't want to admit like what about
when it comes to like Pinker's data
about the world being a better place
because they have almost a vested
interest and stirring up fear and
they're committed that in their mind
they're committed to constantly studying
the the the wrongs of the world and the
evil of the world and that any sort of
diminishing of that is actually going to
cause harm to the people that are
suffering yeah I think they have a good
purpose in their mind there's good
intention I totally agree yeah and the
data are consistent with their
strategies because on average fear
appeals and anger appeals work a whole
lot better than hey man things are great
donate to this cause and we'll keep them
great it doesn't work at all and so when
when viagra was invented in 1989 my
little brother and I were chatting about
it and we thought you know this will
save some animals because there's a lot
of animals that are consumed for their
presumed potency effects by like
traditional Chinese medicine consumers
and things like that and so we thought
boy viagra actually works prior to
viagra nothing is out there that works
up at this 11 impact and so we wrote
this little letter off sent it to a
journal and said you know that this is
gonna save certain animals like seals
which they could be harvested to eat
their penises Canadian seals I know what
I know people that you're you're allowed
to kill a certain number you can't kill
the seals in America they're protected
but in Canada a US but in Canada you can
there's a hood seal a laminate allotment
and a harp seal allotment and so people
are killing up to their allotments and
selling you could do it solely for the
penis and sell the penis for enough
money to make your money back
now what purpose does the seals penis
have beyond the seals original purpose
zilch right but they
eat it because it's supposed to make you
more potent hey saddest one is a rhino
horn right rhino horn is an example
that's used for lots of different things
so it's less likely to be helped but the
seal penis is only you know people
basically only using it first potency
and then when Viet comes along like
literally you're shopping in the
supermarket whether you get hit by
you're gonna get I'll have some seal
penis or I'll take a Viagra well we just
said people are gonna switch we were
greedy you throw both yeah right try
them both and and people did actually
but but we we made this argument and we
literally were attacked by the World
Wildlife Fund government looking at plan
to revive seal penis what hold the fuck
on is this recent it's was update as
published and 2015 but it was updated
this May what the government is looking
at a plan go back up to revive seal
penis sales okay this must be a plan was
brought to the government this must not
be the worst way of like looking at that
headline is that the government's
thinking man we got to fucking revive
these penis sales no one's buying seal
but their mate because they actually
maybe thinking that because you've got
some relatively impoverished people who
are hunting for them and no one's buying
them anymore so if you're not gonna
whale that if you're not not real the
report drafted by the fur Institute
there you go see is aimed at creating
new markets to support an earlier
proposal to kill a hundred and forty
thousand grey seals over five years in
the southern Gulf of st. Lawrence 70
percent of gray seals that frequent the
area so they're what they want to do is
they want to diminish that okay so
here's what it is they have long
complained that the growing population
of gray seals is to blame for eating too
many commercially viable fish which has
resulted in repeated calls for a call
okay so they want to kill the seals so
to save the fish market so they're gonna
get people to buy dicks right so they
make it financially viable look at this
this is racist the penises of juvenile
adult animals may be dried and sold as
sexual enhancement products particularly
to Asian buyers well that's because it's
not meant to be racist is because in
traditional Chinese medicine the seal
penis was used as a potency product I
understand but the target those Asians
those poor fools well they're not
profiles anymore because you know what
they switched so we write this paper and
literally the World Wildlife Fund
attacks
and I did not see that coming right I
thought boy the World Wildlife Fund is
gonna be psyched because here's some
good news for a change right but they
don't want good news they only want bad
news because people pay and they do what
they can to fix things when it's bad
news they and they forget that you got
to have some good news along the way or
people give up look at this this says
here Asian consumers particularly
athletes also consume a beverage called
honey say that dilution oral liquid that
is made from seal penis and testicles
which they believe to be energizing and
performance-enhancing how about some
studies motherfucker before you start
eating sealed dicks why would you take
that when you can get fucking viagra
exactly guarantee a viagra is better it
is I mean if it's not better it's good
enough like what are you trying to do so
so we actually because we got attacked
by the world well of fun we sent to one
of my Ida graduate student from Hong
Kong
we descent him to go back to Hong Kong
for the holidays to go back to you well
the World Wildlife Fund because they
said that we're wrong people won't
switch they said what how would that how
did they phrase it well they wrote an
article they rebutted us and they said
no no our data show when we tried to get
people to switch from rhino and tiger
horn to aspirin they wouldn't and so
they want yeah so they won't switch to
viagra and I'm like look I think fire is
different from aspirin I got a headache
I take an aspirin see yeah I think my
headache got better faster than it would
have otherwise a little bit vague you
need a viagra you take it you're like
yep that sucker worked right there's
visual evidence and so we argue that
it's different and so we actually went
into these clinics and we asked people
in traditional Chinese clinics in Hong
Kong what do you take for a headache
what do you take for gout what do you
take for wrecked-tile dysfunction and
that was the one case where they'd
switched so consumers all over the world
they know when a better product comes
along they know when they've got no
options like well you might as well eat
ooh seals penis because that's as good
as anything or because nothing works
maybe you'll get a little bit of a
placebo effect or you know oh hey look
there's something that actually works
that's what I'm gonna buy what I read
about the one of the issues with rhino
horn with some Asian buyers is that also
it's a it's a signal of affluence that's
exactly right
yeah it's prestige purchase it's so
super sad as shit ever because that is
such a crazy animal but
bizarre creature that almost seems like
a living dinosaur it looks it and we're
losing them left and right
because people are killing them for
their fucking horn which is basically
just collagen right now it's fingernail
yeah that's bananas it just doesn't make
any sense to me that that is still that
they haven't realized that there's no
value in it there's no physical value it
doesn't really give you erections and
supposed to do fever it's got a long
list unfortunately and they're still
buying it and there's no but and they're
buying it again yeah for affluence
like they get it exactly it's like
buying a Maserati wow that's so crazy
that's so sad
oh my daughter's outside the door hi get
out here you bother us yeah it's so
strange to me that there are these
specific cases right like it's not like
people are looking for giraffe horns
looking for rhino horn like what do you
think that they made an association like
damn if I was Jack I know there's chicks
like me I need to get that horn and eat
it might get hard like I do think so
because if you look at the long list of
products they look pretty phallic and
mostly people eat phallic things in
order to gain potency is there something
crazy about seal dicks like what's there
decently sized decent a good word for
that I like that and so you know you
think oh I eat that sucker I'll get big
too right we're so weird but it's so
weird that in in the face of new
evidence that people haven't adopted you
know this new evidence and they still
claim at least some people claim to yes
so our our pre-modern ancestors didn't
understand germs at all right there was
no way they could have it's such a
bizarre idea that something that small
could kill you but they did know that if
I touched you when you were sick I might
end up sick too and that seems almost
like a magical transference and if you
accept this and they all know that like
they they'll they'll shy away we all
evolved chimpanzees that will shy away
from disgusting stuff and open sores and
and people yeah yeah absolutely if you
get the right kinds of illness that that
that manifests that you're seriously
outwardly sick and contagious we're
gonna find it disgusting and so that
kind of magical contagion it's super
easy to see wow that well then it'd make
you think that while rhino horn will
make my dick bigger too yeah I guess I
mean are there any ants
since this where that stuff is real
where it does actually work that way
nothing I know I can't think of any but
it is the case that that you you being
sick will make me sick no question but
nothing that what you eat an animals
thing you consume no but if it is the
case imagine that like after you and I
chat you say hey bill here have my
jacket and now I go out with your jacket
on and people go oh man he's got Joe
Rogan's jacket he's cool and I've got a
little bit of your cool and now the
girls are like me too that does happen
like when Hercules put that lion's head
on that you you kicked some ass to have
that thing that's true yeah
yeah I guess you know it's just manure
we yeah just a human animal itself is
just such a strange thing and the more
you study it the more you go deeper and
deeper into the layers of weirdness that
we are yeah and and psychology is pretty
good about finding out our average
weirdnesses we're not so good at finding
out they're really unusual weirdnesses
because we can't predict that one out of
a thousand behavior very well we can
break what people tend to do when the
bell curves tend to split we can't say
with some random psycho or genius or
artist or whatever will do under those
circumstances because that's not what
our models are designed for yeah it's um
it's it's so interesting when you think
about our interactions also with all the
various animals that we've come up you
come across like all all throughout our
our life as human beings and that people
have chosen some to some to cherish and
some to some to take on as food sources
and some to worship and right and and
often it makes good sense like so dogs
are great because we have great vision
so our noses and ears don't work very
well if we could have somebody around
who could hear and smell well and is on
our side
that's a huge plus right that's worth
feeding that thing or at least
tolerating it and it eats the scraps and
some of them are cats you know they're
knowing they don't like you but they're
good at killing rats and other vermin
that would have once we were
agriculturalists those kind of vermin
would have been a real problem they'd
have been largely irrelevant when we're
still hunter-gatherers but so we we had
dogs we domesticated those while we were
hunter-gatherers but cats the best I
know it was like ancient Egypt and these
these societies are not storing grain
and things like that
so those ancient systems make good sense
you're making a deal with an animal that
can achieve something that you can't
achieve and of course you're living in a
world without chemicals and machines and
all that kind of stuff
but tons of them are just totally random
and in this culture that thing is a
worshiped in this culture it's eaten and
you know and that that sort of stuff is
super hard to predict now in studying
all this stuff and writing this book how
much does this change the way you just
see humans like as you're just going to
the mall okay it does change it right so
you see like I remember being proud of
my son when he told a lie because I was
like oh good on you mate and so we're in
the poor in the playground and this
little boys playing with him and my son
doesn't have a lunchbox at all he
doesn't own one and the little boy says
I got a spider-man lunchbox and my son
is like four four and a half and he
looks at the kid and he doesn't know his
fighter minutes because he hasn't seen
the show yet but he knows it's offic the
kids bragging it's obviously something
good and he goes yeah I got a grassman
and a leaf man lunchbox nobody he just
made the shit up right because spiders
right the Spider Man there's a grasp and
he's looking around for other things
right and so I was actually proud of him
because it showed a he's got theory mine
down he knows what the kid can and can't
know and B he knows that telling these
stories are gonna be important for his
place in the social hierarchy so the kid
looks at me and I'm like trying not to
laugh right cuz I got to support my son
and he's like really and I'm like damn
right kid and so you you can imagine
that it without this background you
might say look we should discourage this
kind of line right but it gives you a
little bit of a different perspective on
it's also probably weird because you you
know your kid realizes yeah my dad's got
my back well that's good thanks bro
exactly and then she'd always have your
kids back yeah but grass man and leaf
man you got a poem aside like dude try
to do something that's got what Congrats
man actually do besides photosynthesize
but he was on the spur of the moment and
he's only four so I decided it was good
enough yeah and then is also cattle
worshiping is very fascinating to the
like the Hindus and all these different
different tribes and different cultures
that worshipped cattle where other
people just thought of them as food
sources right and so again now I don't
know the origins that
you can imagine a system whereby well if
you keep cattle and you benefit from
them rather than eating them you're
gonna get some gains from that and we do
know when you shift from being on
together to basically kill in and eat
and stuff to being a pastoralist so
you're you have cattle or sheep or
whatever or to being a farmer you
suddenly have to start taking on the
long game so humans are perfectly
capable of envisioning unfelt needs no
matter what kind of society they're in
but hunter-gatherers are living for
today and so it's it's kill it
you know hunt it share it out amongst
all of us and then we eat it and then
we'll worry about tomorrow when it comes
along well once you shift to having
herds or having land you can't that
psychology doesn't work anymore and so
what's super interesting is it took
literally like 10 or 20,000 years we've
got the implements in place to be
agricultural as but we're not planting
and it just were just grinding stuff
that we gather and why did it take so
long to plant well maybe it was weather
maybe it was a bunch of things but part
of is you have to shift your psychology
over and say all right I got to stop
thinking about eating killin a nyan it
today I got to say well all right well
would it be beneficial to me to keep
this beast around and have it for
tomorrow and drink its blood or its milk
or whatever and one way to get there
might have been well let's let's create
a religion that says we can't eat them
today because that'll solve it
immediately right that's one way to look
at it but have you ever looked into some
of the other hypothesis on the origin of
cattle worship I think it again has to
do with psilocybin because they know
that could be totally cool right growing
cow shit and that'd be totally cool and
not only that but it would because it
has benefits so like societies can do
anything they want right and there's
some crazy systems that they do and a
lot of those are really bad ideas
they're sources of infection and disease
and death and those societies tend not
to grow but societies that do things
that happen to be good ideas even if
they got it from mushrooms and things
like that
those are gonna really pass along and so
you got a lot of people on this planet
to worship cows which suggests that
whatever got that started actually
probably had a benefit because those
societies grew and because worshipping
cows not something like when you come to
me and say man I worship cows and I'm
thinking okay I'd rather eat them but
fine right it's hard to imagine being
persuaded but it's easy to imagine
growing up in that system over imitating
right we talked about that you
automatically just copy dad worships
cows things are working out well for him
I'll do the same right and then you've
got and that
good thing for your society - because
you can drink its blood or its milk or
whichever you're lactose tolerant
whatever you do and then that allows
your society to grow was there anything
surprising to you in in writing this
book and researching it and putting it
together was there anything that really
just had made you step back and go wow I
didn't see that one coming
look there's a lot of things that I
didn't see coming and a lot of times
where I thought I had an idea of how it
all worked and then I thought I would
read a lot of more papers and I go
that's not even possible they didn't
have that capability or whatever what
what surprised me was that I a big part
of the where this book comes from is
that then colleagues would say they
would know I'm working on this and
they'd say well come give a talk at my
conference on leadership and I'd say
well I don't know anything about
leadership well surely something it must
have implications for that and every
time they ask me to do that you know I'd
say okay I'll give it a try and then
literally you sit down and think about
it you guys wow there are important
implications for leadership or
innovation or happiness or sociality and
I never saw them coming and so as
literally friends of mine kind of forced
I had one goal which is just understand
social intelligence and how did we
become so socially intelligent and the
and that was where I started and friends
just kept asking me to look at other
things and every time I did there was an
answer sometimes there was an answer
that's easier to find and it's harder to
find but it was always there and what
that tells me is that there's really a
lot of value and taking the anthropology
in the biology and putting them together
and saying alright where do we come from
and now what can that tell us about who
we are today
that's an interesting stuff like sort of
a intellectual exercise to write a
different perspective on the material
that you're going over is somebody
forces you into a little box like tell
me you know what what happened you know
what's the influence on or what the
impact on creativity yeah what's the
impact on leadership or all these
different yeah yeah yeah just to give
you a different view let's look at it
from the left let's look at it from the
top from below and now it's so fun about
Sciences you could say all right well
let's see if it tells us anything that
either we already know is true and now
we could get new things that we would
know about it or if it tells us
something that we don't even know but
that might explain the way the world is
and both of those are valuable because
then you can run off and try to test
them and a lot of dead ends I mean
that's what science is all about but
some of them will hopefully not be dead
ends and you'll run off and test and say
holy shit now
understand innovation now I understand
whatever what's interesting about this
kind of material is that it gives you
did me as a individual gives me insight
in my own behavior and I think it would
do a lot of people do all of us some
real good if we had a better
understanding of what our motivations
are and how we got to this point in
civilization what we actually are you
know I mean maybe a will or won't change
your behavior but at least it'll give
you some insight into oh I totally agree
and the thing is that when I find myself
getting upset because you disagree with
me about something trivial or even
important like politics or something and
it takes a second you gotta stop say
hold on I don't have any privileged
access to the right way to do things
right and so the fact that you care more
about X and I care more about why
doesn't mean that you're like an evil
person and must be overcome it means
that probably we ought to be talking to
each other and trying to find a
compromise solution that makes things
work best but there's this automatic
incident I think that you are evil
absolutely and so the beauty of this
kind of more you know about this stuff
in the past and our evolution our
origins the more you know that literally
we've evolved to do that because if we
didn't do that we're screwed but now we
don't need to anymore and so now we can
say well hold on I'm a lefty and you're
you know in my example you're a righty
and we disagree about this particular
president but a fine
let's see if we can both agree on a goal
that will make both of us happy rather
than oh you're evil and all I have to do
is overcome you one of the things that
I've really tried very hard from doing
this podcast is to not be attached ideas
and to do that as an exercise and I
think over the course of the years I've
been doing this I've gotten way way
better at that but it's it's just so
fascinating when I encounter in the raw
form like when I go to a party and I
just run into some guy was a dad and he
brings something up and I tell mom it's
not totally true because of this and
then you see this like the blood starts
yeah pumping and the heart starts
beating and they're trying to look at
some way you're wrong and you know it
becomes a personal thing it gets very
very heated and it's easy for all of us
to do that and my job and your job is
the same it's to say okay is it time to
abandon this ideas or time to defend
yeah and when I was young in an academic
there was no way I was abandoning that
was lost all I was gonna do was defend
so you attacked me and I Marshall
everything I can and I
to attack you back and it was some of my
colleagues are like hey man you know
it's when you're wrong it's cool that's
what science is and I'm like ah you're
right you're right I've got it started
and so now even though I love the
give-and-take of academics and I love to
argue about stuff I try really really
hard to keep in my mind well what if
what you're saying right now is right
rather than trying to just attack it
which is my automatic instinct to say
well what of what of it that you're
saying now might be a value that I
should actually be incorporating and not
trying to stomp on yeah and also just
the ideas aren't you exactly you're you
and these ideas are just something that
you're tossing around like a beach ball
yeah exactly right and that's super hard
to keep in mind because everything that
we come to own we get attached to and if
I tend to have my ideas because they
tend to make the world a more hospitable
place to bill then in a way I kind of do
need to defend them because if you
convince me know the way the world
should work is whoever is strongest gets
everything well I'm stuffed and so I
need to try to fight against a lot of
alternative views and and I have to
overcome that in my effort to define
what the right answer is as well so it's
good makes good sense that our ideas of
like possessions that we have attitudes
toward our ideas just like we have
toward the objects that we own that
means something to us to our family to
our group etc that all makes really good
sense and and the other side of that
coin is if we talking about the way
things used to be in a pre-medical world
if you're the chances of you carrying
different pathogens and I carry is
reasonably high and if you infect me I'm
screwed now if you do things differently
than I do things so you eat this food
and I eat that food well it different
could actually be wrong from my
perspective because if I do what you've
done I might get myself sick because
you've adapted to that that thing and so
we literally probably for good
evolutionary reasons came to view
cultural ways of doing things that are
different as if they're wrong because
that saved us that protected us from the
kind of pathogen vectors that you've
gotten adapted to but that I haven't
that's fascinating so that this is
almost like ingrained in us yeah well
it's we've evolved to be this way
and so it's hard to undo that do you
think that with the access to
information that we're currently
enjoying that because there's so much
information now and it's so easy to get
to that perhaps there'll be more
instances of people not becoming
attached to their ideas and recognizing
that they are
there they are separate the you are just
a thinking organism and what the facts
are and what reality is is just
something that's happening and you don't
have to be personally attached to it
it's not a part of your identity yeah I
hope so because in an ideal world we
could have the things that were attached
to that don't really matter I'm an
iPhone guy and you're an Android right
who cares right we could argue about it
and be silly and exactly exactly we
could still be friends and all that and
then we could when there's something
that mattered and know this this
political strategy will make everyone
poorer or sicker or whatever then we
could be willing to change their minds
because in the end I think we've got
this evolved desire to latch onto these
things these ideas and values and and
products even and I all that and so it'd
be nice if we could do it with the
trivial and let the stuff that really
matters guide our us by its accuracy
well it'd be also nice if that the stuff
that we do with trivial it stays
actually trivial yeah because there's so
many people and well I guess it goes
with sports teams and but it also goes
with like brands of cars like I've heard
people say I've always been a Ford guy I
love for it's like okay yeah I probably
remind you the Ford your dad drove or
whatever I guess but it's like I would
never buy a Chevy alright okay look
really never it's funny is like what if
the best fucking car was a Chevy and you
have the opportunity to buy like no no
I'm a Ford guy like right wait what
benefit would some strange reason this
there's some weird motivation to stick
to your initial statements yeah so I
think it's like all our Wendell Holmes
or someone who's had a foolish
consistency is the hobgoblin to small
minds right but we all have these
consistencies ass because part of the
problem is if I move around with the
wind you look at me as I'm a nothing
right I can't stand flop if I can't
stand by what I believe in then you have
no respect for me but what if you boot
what if you what you believe in is
incorrect
right that's that's my Psicosis probably
into that right and so that's that's
where it gets real right and so what you
obviously would you ideally want it's
here's my value structure and it's
unchangeable and then negotiable yes and
yet when you show me that I'm in that my
attitudes are impeding my own goals then
I'm willing to change them to achieve
that value structure and and I think the
best politicians and scientists and
artists
and comedians and all the rest are the
ones who can do that yeah well I like
what you said like here's my value
structure this is these are my ethics
these are my morals this is how I treat
people this is who I am but all that
other stuff is just information yeah
it's all means to an end and so some
people care a lot about loyalty other
people care a lot about fairness other
people care a lot about sanctity and
purity right there's different values
that are important all of the world we
all care about them but some people wait
one set more important more than another
set yeah John Hyde if you I don't know
if you've had him on your show he does
this work and he's one of the first
people to push these ideas and you can
predict them by people's politics and
stuff like that and so if we all agree
they all matter but the problem is then
we get into an argument where you tell
me loyalty is more important than I tell
you fairness or harm is more important
and then we're never gonna see eye to
eye you know with two humans that are
healthy that's an interesting discussion
because why do you think fairness is
more important why do I think discipline
is more important than fairness or
education is more whatever it is hey I
think that when someone clings to this
idea that this is the most significant
aspect of human civilization that's
always weird yeah and it's hard when
they can't acknowledge other possibility
right right and some and again all these
things are I hate to say but they're
like 50 percent genetic right some of us
are more open-minded and some of us are
more closed-minded and there's probably
good reasons to be that way that made
your that made you successful under one
set of circumstances versus another
because you know extraversion for
example almost all people prefer
extroverts over introverts but
extroverts are all sorts of risk for
disease because they're constantly up in
everyone's face and so in ancestral
environments it was probably pretty
costly to be extroverted and you'd you
paid a price and that introverts didn't
have to pay when you got sick there's
also like we gain so much creativity and
insight from introvert of course no but
it but but at a social level extroverts
benefit introverts might benefit by then
running Microsoft and being the greatest
artist and all that and that's again
this band that we talked about this
earlier the beauty about being human is
how many different ways you can achieve
the same goal yeah what are your
thoughts on the influence of epigenetics
look it's super interesting so my my I
know little about it very little about
it my behavioral genetics colleague
insists that there's no good evidence
among humans from
multi-generational epigenetic effects we
know that they exist now in some animals
we can do the experiments pretty easily
to get these multi-generational
epigenetic epigenetic effects plain to
people what we're talking about yeah so
epigenetics is basically you can turn
genes on and off in the simplest sense
and so environmental factors will matter
like maybe when you're in utero there's
a famine and that's a common thing
that's looked at well look at that in in
rats for example will under feed the
mother when the baby's in there and that
causes the babies methylation of some of
the genes I don't understand the science
of it at all but it turns some genes on
and some genes off and so a baby of a
mother rat who was raised who was in
utero when the mother was under fed will
mature more rapidly it'll eat everything
that's not nailed down and it'll have
sex with lots more rats than unregular
than a rat that wasn't it didn't have
its mother starved and the key thing is
that makes good sense because it's a way
to respond to times of famine grow as
fast as you can
reproduce as quickly as you can because
you know reproductions the currency of
evolution the fact that you exist and
live is trivial the fact that you passed
on your genes that's what evolution
works with so it's a great way to change
with the local environment and there's
some very interesting evidence that then
those effects are even in the next
generation so the the child of a rat
that was that was in a mother who was
underfed will also have some of these
strategies didn't believe they find that
in humans as well we all have suffered
from famine that's the argument but none
of the data my behavioral genetics says
none of those data are robust enough
it's sort of like some of the Christians
you made of what I've said and you're
right
the data suggests things that might be
but there's lots of alternative
explanations right so we don't yet know
I mean I've read is about longevity and
that there was some sort of evidence
that points to the the descendants of
people who survived famine they they
live longer right and so the the
question might be why and so we know for
example that if you're in utero during
famine males are more likely to be
aborted than females when it gets really
bad mmm
female fetuses are probably more robust
but if you ignore that gender effect in
all probability those fetuses that could
survive and a mother during famine might
just be the more robust specimens right
and so you might just be calling out the
people who wouldn't have lived
as long Brian and so it's super hard you
know you don't do experiments on these
things in humans you can do experiments
on mice and rats and and try to find
these things out the downside is you
know if you've read about a million
cancer drugs that are really gonna help
us and they disappear it's because it
works in a mouse and it doesn't work in
us and the downside of these things is
even mice and rats differ from each
other and so and we're a long way from
either of them and so their epigenetic
effects that they show there may be good
reason why we don't yeah there's some
real ethical questions in regard to
running studies like that on human being
exactly we're gonna have to develop
headless humans in a lab that have no
soul that we could do tests on but we
could but I actually think that what
will get really good at is the issue you
raised earlier and that is I don't know
everything that's ever happened to you
but someday it'll be possible to know a
ton of that stuff yeah and I'll be able
to rule out all sorts of alternative
causes and Diet is a perfect example you
guys talk about that a lot in the show
well how do we know that this particular
collection of foods will actually do you
any good how do we know how well people
are sticking to it and a big part of
those effects are actually the
psychological effects so protein is a
really good example that you know Steve
Simpson argued in the early 90s that if
you he started with locusts that animals
are motivated to eat as a function of
how much protein that they've consumed
and so the Atkins diet was the right
idea but a misunderstanding of the cause
it's just that protein we evolved to
feel full when you get protein we didn't
evolve to feel full from carbohydrates
and there's a host of reasons for that
and there's a host of other effects that
are going on at the same time but the
consequence of that is then when
people's diets move around you say oh
look this diet is this effect and that
one doesn't but you don't actually know
what they've been doing because some
diets are harder to maintain and they're
cheating more or whatever someday we'll
have much better evidence and all that
you'll be wearing a device I'll know
once you consume don't know an
accelerometer on the wall everything
that happened to you well that's another
interesting aspect of genetics right
there's one thing that we absolutely
know is that some people respond
differently to diets and other people do
and you know for some person a
particular type of diet is like
beneficial and perfect and just locks in
and other person it would be horrible
yeah
absolutely that's weird you know no it
cross the species you know find out with
dogs or but it at an ethnic level
perfect yes because the people who've
been eating different foods for a long
period of time after to adapt to them
yet
and of coarse aggregate sir is only
12,000 years old total although we've
been eating cereals before that and lots
of societies didn't have it at all
or only had it very recently and so it's
super hard for some people eat grains
compared to other people to eat grains
because they're they haven't adapted
either diabetes wise or all the other
kinds of things that it can cause it to
go wrong certainly with alcohol that's a
giant yeah exactly an alcohol it gets
invented every time someone invents
agriculture because all you do is you
accidentally leave it there too long and
then ferments right and so the and
there's an argument that we actually
evolved to have a tolerance for beer
rather than a distaste for it because
once we're in early agricultural
settlements for the first time ever were
crapping where we're drinking we're not
moving on
and so we foul our own drinking water so
beers literally safer to drink than
water
beer and wine low grade alcohol and so
what the data said suggests what people
argue is that we evolved to actually
have a taste for it but by the tolerance
to it rather than a distaste for which
would make sense evolutionarily it's
getting drunk with hippos running around
can't be a good idea also if you think
about wine or any booze the first time
you drink it it's disgust yeah yeah it's
hard to develop a taste for it's exactly
right and so and lots of things that
that way Tabasco you know lots of these
spices have antibacterial effects yeah
and so the mothers are giving it to the
kids we're like on my mouth to be on
fire if I ate with some six-year-old
Candide in India or something wasn't
that initially why they added wasabi to
sushi that's what a lot of people argue
and in fact as you work your way from
the poles to the equator you get more
and more spices because of course in
Sweden there's six pathogens and you got
salt and pepper and in jungle and then
Africa you have a gazillion spices to do
garlic all these things are super
powerful antibacterials wow that is a
really interesting way of looking at it
yeah I'm sure right
like Mexico very high in spicy food warm
climate totally makes sense exactly and
the same thing happens we've found the
profusion of religions and languages the
closer you get to the equator the more
right languages you have and the more
religions you have because people start
saying you know on the other side of the
valley literally you could have a
pathogen that makes me sick and so I'm
gonna stay away from you and by staying
away from you over time we develop
different languages different religions
again back to Sweden whatever you got I
got there's three things to have right
and so you're not a risk to me and we
share the same language we intermingle
much more readily and there's more
ethnocentrism as you go close to the
equator Wow to keep and keeping apart
makes good evolutionary sense under
those circumstances but we live in a
world where no one's keeping apart exact
now we live in a world where it makes it
much much more difficult and you don't
necessarily stay in our in our blessed
industrialized democracies where we've
got good medicines at least for now they
still work you don't need to anymore
right but we also have these crazy
factory farming setups that lead to the
kind of horrible superbugs that can kill
a million handle yeah we do it I
remember when I first found that out
that most of the major flus like avian
flu swine flu I didn't know why they
were calling it the swine flu yeah and
then I found out no it's from
domesticated pigs and it's somehow
morphed and jumps to humans like why and
that was the cost we paid with
agriculture so the first time we were
starting to get we are cheek by jowl
with a bunch of animals and agriculture
I'm gonna have to gathers eat them they
the animal never lives long enough to
give you the flu right Wow so everything
you know there's always pluses and
minuses when you change how you do
things and we you and I are really lucky
we live in a time where all these great
medicines exist and they haven't become
worthless yet and now it's really a race
against the if all evolution of the
bacteria and us devising new medicines
that can continue to defeat them because
everything is becoming treatment
resistant right that's how evolution
works and and that's just starting to
happen and so now scientists have to
work double time to keep inventing new
drugs to stay ahead of the game with the
exception of some things that just for
whatever reason bacteria don't seem to
be all of all resistances to them
well what's fascinating to me is not
just scientists creating these vaccines
and all these different medicines to
deal with these diseases but the
potential of shutting off genes the
potential of altering the human genome
and using things like whatever the the
future version of CRISPR is going to be
to I mean they've already figured out a
way to stop certain diseases right so
those single gene things are great yeah
remember with everything being so
polygenic you don't just want to shut
shit down willy-nilly right and so then
really what you're at the advantage is
the point you made earlier so my diet
should be 60% protein in your should be
percent or mine should have more leafy
vegetables than yours whatever and we'll
be able to know that well know how my
guts gonna respond to it and how you're
gonna respond to it well that's one of
the things that 23andme actually does
they do they do show like what foods
you'd be more likely to be allergic to
and what things might be most likely to
be directed and that's a great start but
what we really need is to polygenic
scores to tell you how do you process
leafy vegetables how do you process fats
how do you process all that stuff yeah
and so because you know genes account
for most of our weight that's most of
the variance in our weather or obese or
not but nobody was obese when you and I
were kids
Brian tons of people are obese now so
what those genes really are is genes to
sensitivity to something change in our
environment either activity levels of
the foods reading or how process they
are or how much carbs or whatever we
don't know but that's what we're
actually genetically sensitive to
because all of us have the same
underlying problem that evolution didn't
really worry about obesity because the
problem was the opposite starving yeah
and so we're not really good at telling
when we're full and there's interesting
evidence that suggests some really
lovely studies that show that really one
of the key guides of appetite was
variety when you eat a lot less variety
your that's when your stomach tells you
you're full really much more reliably
but as you add variety to your diet
which everybody on earth can do now well
everybody's got any money on earth can
do now that actually you you
short-circuit the best mechanism we had
to tell us to stop eating yeah that's
interesting and now is an argument that
people who are experts on nutrition are
making about one of the more recent diet
plans that people using the carnivore
diet is that just eating only meat and
there's a lot of people that are doing
that and they're finding that they're
having all these like really rapid
decreases in autoimmune diseases and
rapid recoveries from eczema and
seborrhea and psoriasis and the people
that are a lot of people are saying oh
it's the meat meats great for you meats
great for him and some nutrition experts
saying more likely this is a calorie
like you're at a calorie deficit right
and by putting your body into a calorie
deficit you're almost like in a state of
fasting and you're decreasing your body
weight because almost universally all
these people that are there
talking about the positive benefits of
these diets these elimination diets and
just eating one thing one of the things
that they're showing is they lose a
shitload of weight right and so the
thing is that I suspect you right that
either they're cutting out what for them
is the perpetrator and who would ever
know out of the 4,000 things right or
it's literally the losing weight and
then hopefully they're taking
multivitamins to make up for all the
stuff that they're not getting right
yeah I don't think they are a lot of
them are not doing that it's really
interesting I've been following it
pretty closely and I've had quite a few
people in the podcast including really
intelligent guys like Jordan Peterson is
on this and does in salt right and for
me that wouldn't work although I am I
meet in fruit basically and then very
little else
what about grief you leafy green
vegetable I know I should but I don't
like them so I yeah I edible oh I know I
should so I my my wife makes them and
I'll eat a little bit of it but like a
little kid yeah I know I know but in my
way it's like no I know and your 8 year
olds right now by the way it turns out
there are genes that make people find
broccoli more disgusting and and more at
a more bitter versus less bitter so some
people really have their tongue says no
broccoli is recalled as being a little
baby gene but the one thing I would say
there's this really lovely study done
with that musics and what they did is
they fed people a couple different foods
and you try a few and then you eat one
until you're full and then when you come
back to I don't know if you know this
work like Paul rosin started with them
musics if you if I if you're densely on
music so I talked to you I leave the
room I come back five minutes later you
don't know who I am and you got brain
damage when I come back with lunch
literally you lead a second lunch we
have such poor mechanism that tells us
we're full we think we do we think oh
I've had a great dinner I'm really full
but we don't realize is that's really
driven a lot by the knowledge that we
just ate Wow and so what rosin found
when he went back in debt he had eat
lunch to you're full he goes back in
says have time for lunch and literally
they all eat it again and so what's
what's amazing about these studies is
then this follow-up study what they did
is they served a music sore control for
people foods that they sampled and food
that they till their full so you sample
potato chips and then you eat a tuna
sandwich and now I come back to you and
say if you're a normal and I say do you
want to eat a potato chip do you want to
eat a tuna sandwich if you're normally
say well I just had lunch I'm not really
that keen deed either of them anymore
if you're on music you say I don't want
a tuna sandwich but yeah I'll have some
potato chips and so you don't even need
to know you ate it and and so your
hunger mechanism is still there but the
fact is you've had a lot of tuna
sandwich and that's controlling your
appetite it's making you feel like you
don't want to eat it anymore
and so in the same sense you go to steak
house you think well I love this my
favorite steak I can eat a forever and
then you finish it or not and then you
think oh I'm stuffed that somebody goes
dessert actually yeah that does sound
good because now you're shifting and
you're eating something else and so I
suspect that what guided our ancestors
was the fact they had no variety what's
for dinner was not a question you ever
asked when it whatever dad killed him
whatever mom dug up like there's two
things there right right and so you're
gonna gorge on the meat there's not a
vegetarian hunter-gatherer on the planet
you when you when you're hungry every
day everybody loves me it's not only
whatever you can everybody loves it and
every time together Society Mead is a
big deal someone comes home with a big
kill it's a big deal when you can afford
to be very well fed suddenly you can
start to think differently and even have
different preferences but you don't if
you're on together and so literally if
dad killed a giraffe you're just
stuffing as much to rough me down the
pipe as you can and it makes sense of
you to then evolved okay you're gonna
get nothing new out of the giraffe you
eat other than you're gonna pull it out
the back end it's time to shut this
dinner down right but if you told me oh
look we've we've got this other thing
that's how well there's nutrients in
that I don't already have and so you
could imagine getting hungry again
that's what the data suggests well it's
interesting because that's kind of the
argument that these carnivore diet
people use is that that is the most
beneficial food because that's the food
that you look forward to the most it the
right but don't forget you only need to
do this within every meal so if you sit
down for your favorite lobster dinner
just have lobster and then that doesn't
you have to eat it for lunch or for
breakfast tomorrow now you can have
whatever pancakes whatever it is the key
is within every meal minimize your
variety because that's where the effect
is having itself it doesn't have to
carry over time it doesn't mean you eat
lobster every single meal you know
what's interesting that's that's
actually the Gracie diet there's a
jiu-jitsu family called the Gracie's
that started the UFC and world-famous
Brazilian jiu-jitsu family but just a
family Philip killers and one of the
founders I believe is Carlos Gracie
invented this he invented a diet that
was basically you shouldn't mix
foods together if you're eating fruits
you should eat fruits by themselves
you've meet you sheet that by itself and
that in combining all these things
together your body produces a variety of
different enzymes you don't get as much
nutritional absorption now that may be I
have no idea I don't know I don't
understand the underlying bioscience but
what I do know the psychology suggests
that you'll stop eating sooner if within
any one meal you have less variety so
permit a psychological level we've we
appear to have evolved to not want that
anymore when we've had enough of that be
it a taro root or mom dug up or a
giraffe our dad shot so these sort of
evolutionary traits that are inside of
our bodies they would they would sort of
encourage us to eat much more if we have
a variety of foods like if you're eating
at a buffet in Vegas yeah versus if you
just eating chicken that's not chicken
you'll eat as much chicken as really you
need and then I don't want any more
chicken but if there's chicken and
mashed potatoes you keep going and then
coleslaw and our ancestors never face
their problems to date we don't know how
to deal with it right and the other side
of that coin and so what Steve Simpson
did this guy who did the early study on
protein and locust he took his biology
students on field trips and he would
doctor the food to increase the protein
in the food or decrease it in the food
but it's the exact same foods like
you're eating the same roles in the same
sushi but he's you know increasing the
levels of protein in those foods and
then I'll it's a buffet and all he does
is weigh the food when it starts and
when it finishes across all the students
eating it and he found that as the
protein levels go up the amount of food
that people eat at the buffet goes down
so there's these two parallel mechanisms
one were made of protein and so that
seems carbs do Drive appetite but not
nearly as strongly as proteins do so you
the tolerance and how much carbs you
lead is huge
the tolerance how much proteins you lead
is very narrow and he finds that of
course and he finds that in crickets and
now he finds it in humans and then I
think the other side of that coin is
this variety and the bad luck for us
right now is we live in a world where
especially if you're poor proteins are
expensive and hard to get so you're
gonna have these high carb diets and
then everybody can have variety and
variety is probably a really bad thing
that is so fascinating is that our good
fortune yeah is our demise exactly in so
many ways I mean you know we evolved to
seek out fat sugar and salt because
there
supply another now you if you eat them
every time you see them you're stuffed
right there everywhere man I mean
everything you eat is fat sugar and so
exactly and then the other and it's not
just what you eat
we also evolved so if there's a novel
purchase person the opposite sex who
comes along boy what a rare event that
was maybe that sugar exactly you should
jump on that train right because that'll
give you new genetic opportunities but
you look out the door there's novelty
everywhere it's super hard it's hard to
stay married in the city than it is in
the country it's hard to stay married if
you're celebrity than if you're a nobody
because those people are just a novelty
constantly they a variety constantly and
the rest of us well you know there may
be variety out there but they're not
interested in me so it's kind of
irrelevant anywhere all right bill thank
you so much totally my decision I can't
wait to read your book excellent up for
everybody it's available right now
assumption deep go get it you fucks this
is awesome thank you so much thank you
really fun a lot of fun
thank you bye everybody
[Music]